 CONNECTED STRATEGY

Building Continuous Customer
Relationships for Competitive
          Advantage

     Nicolaj Siggelkow
     Christian Terwiesch




       HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW PRESS
          BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS
                               HBR Press Quantity Sales Discounts
   Harvard Business Review Press titles are available at significant quantity discounts when
   purchased in bulk for client gifts, sales promotions, and premiums. Special editions, including
   books with corporate logos, customized covers, and letters from the company or CEO printed
   in the front matter, as well as excerpts of existing books, can also be created in large
   quantities for special needs.
                       For details and discount information for both print and
                      ebook formats, contact booksales@harvardbusiness.org,
                           tel. 800-988-0886, or www.hbr.org/bulksales.


Copyright 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation
All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise), without the prior permission of the publisher. Requests for permission should be directed
to permissions@hbsp.harvard.edu, or mailed to Permissions, Harvard Business School Publishing, 60
Harvard Way, Boston, Massachusetts 02163.
The web addresses referenced in this book were live and correct at the time of the book’s publication
but may be subject to change.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Siggelkow, Nicolaj, author. | Terwiesch, Christian, author.
Title: Connected strategy : building continuous customer relationships for competitive advantage /
   Nicolaj Siggelkow, Christian Terwiesch.
Description: Boston, Massachusetts : Harvard Business Review Press, 2019. | Includes
   bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018047850 | ISBN 9781633697003 (hardcover)
Subjects: LCSH: Relationship marketing. | Customer services—Technological innovations. |
   Communication in consumer education.
Classification: LCC HF5415.55 .S55 2019 | DDC 658.8/12—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn
   .loc.gov/2018047850
ISBN: 978-1-63369-700-3
eISBN: 978-1-63369-701-0
    To my dad, who would have been
          the proudest reader
                 (NS)
To my parents, who taught me more about
   business than any school ever could
                  (CT)
                    CONTENTS


Prologue: The Magic of Connected Strategy

    1. The Connected Strategy Framework

PART ONE
THE REWARDS OF CONNECTED STRATEGIES
    2. Breaking the Trade-off between Superior Customer Experience
       and Lowering Costs
    3. Workshop 1
       Using Connectivity to Provide Superior Customer Experiences
       at Lower Costs

PART TWO
CREATING CONNECTED CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS
    4. Recognize, Request, and Respond
       Building Connected Customer Experiences
    5. Repeat
       Building Customer Relationships to Create Competitive
       Advantage
    6. Workshop 2
       Building Connected Customer Relationships

PART THREE
CREATING CONNECTED DELIVERY MODELS
    7. Designing Connection Architectures
    8. Revenue Models for Connected Strategies
    9. Technology Infrastructure for Connected Strategies
   10. Workshop 3
       Building Your Connected Delivery Model

Epilogue: Seizing the Connected Strategy Potential

Sources
Index
About the Authors and Acknowledgments
                          PROLOGUE

            The Magic of Connected
                  Strategy


The practices of entertainment giant Disney illustrate a seismic shift in how
firms create competitive advantage through what we term connected
strategy. Firms with a connected strategy fundamentally change how they
interact with their customers and what connections they create among the
various players in their ecosystem. At its core, a connected strategy
transforms traditional, episodic interactions with customers into connected
customer relationships that are characterized by continuous, low-friction,
and personalized interactions.
   For years, Disney has organized mini-camps for children as part of its
cruise operations. Stressed-out parents on a Disney cruise can drop off their
kids for a few hours in order to get some private time on board. Disney has
always taken its responsibility for the children in its care seriously. Until
2005, this meant stopping camp activities every thirty minutes for roll call,
thus creating extra work for the staff and interrupting the fun. In 2005,
Disney began using monitors to track their small campers—monitors
originally developed in the medical field to keep track of dementia patients
who were at risk of wandering off. The children were outfitted with little
bracelets that identified them and pinpointed their location within the ship.
   This was the starting point for a whole new Disney experience named
MagicPlus. With the ability to know the identity and location of every
guest, Disney soon asked how else it could use MagicPlus to enhance the
guest experience and improve operational efficiency.
   The answers that emerged touched on a remarkably broad range of its
theme park operations. As part of its meet-and-greet program, Disney
characters routinely interact with young guests in the park. Before
MagicPlus, later renamed MagicBand, Disney’s cast members posing as
Mickey Mouse or Captain Jack Sparrow knew little about the children.
With the MagicBand, Mickey and the captain not only knew each child’s
name but were also aware of the family’s prior visits to Disney theme parks
around the world. If six-year-old Sydney met Mickey Mouse last year in
Orlando and this year was at the Anaheim park, Mickey would “remember”
the first encounter, making the child’s experience truly magical.
   Beyond creating enhanced customer experiences, the MagicBand also
improved park operations, thus reducing Disney’s costs—a truly magical
outcome from a business perspective. From tracking food orders to
handling guest complaints, from identifying each guest to having access on
a tablet to all their prior interactions with cast members, efficiency was
greatly improved. Moreover, the MagicBand allowed guests to make
reservations at busy attractions for predefined time windows, slashing their
wait times. This enabled Disney to direct the stream of visitors and jump-
start operations at the beginning of the day, increasing the overall number of
visitors that could be handled by a theme park while maintaining a great
visitor experience.
   Connected strategies unfold in a rapidly changing environment. Given its
success, one would imagine that Disney would equip every park with the
MagicBand. But this is not the case. When Disney opened its Shanghai
Disney Resort, it decided against the move. It wasn’t that the Chinese failed
to appreciate the magic. Instead, by the time of the park’s opening, a more
efficient alternative had arrived, and almost every visitor already had this
magical technology in his or her pocket: a smartphone. Equipped with the
right apps, today’s phones offer all the information and access to Disney
that the MagicBand had provided.
   The common theme of the Disney story and many more case studies in
this book is that we are living in a world where new forms of connectivity
are transforming the way companies do business. Connected strategies
allow you, as an executive, to create superior customer experiences while
simultaneously achieving dramatic improvements in operational
efficiencies. In short, connected strategies can substantially relax the trade-
off that firms have traditionally faced between providing superior customer
experiences and lowering costs. Adopting connected strategies allows firms
to create a formidable competitive advantage. Not surprisingly, their rapid
rise is creating new winners and losers in its wake.
    The technologies behind connected strategies are improving at a
dizzying speed. The world’s estimated three billion smartphones pack the
power of supercomputers from only a decade ago. The Internet of Things
enables instant communication among systems that couldn’t talk to each
other before. Wearable health and fitness trackers now rival traditional
medical devices in their accuracy. And recommendation systems driven by
artificial intelligence deliver insights faster than humans ever could. With
all these advancements, magical user experiences are coming to life in
many industries. What is fascinating, however, is that the technology per se
is usually relegated to a supporting role. The key innovation of connected
strategies lies in their revamping of a firm’s business model. Consider the
following four examples.
    Amazon redefined how retailers interact with customers. Until recently,
customers were forever making long shopping lists and driving to various
stores. Now, they can tell Amazon’s Alexa to order food, clothing, or just
about anything else, and the products are delivered to the customer’s house,
sometimes within hours. Beyond Alexa, Amazon also introduced the Dash
Button, a small Wi-Fi device that customers can attach to the refrigerator,
washing machine, or bathroom vanity and press to reorder bottled water,
detergent, toilet paper, and much more.
    College textbook publishing is also going through a fundamental
transformation. In the old days, students would buy or rent their textbook,
read the assigned chapters (or at least intend to do so), and then prepare for
their final exam by tackling a set of practice problems at the end of each
chapter. Now, McGraw-Hill Higher Education, for example, has abandoned
the word book and instead aims to sell digital learning experiences. Not
only are the books fully digital, they are also smart. As students go through
the semester, technology tracks their reading and feeds the data back to the
professor and the publisher. When a student is struggling with an
assignment, the book redirects the student to the appropriate chapter and
potentially offers a short video message on how to handle a similar
assignment. Each student thus receives a curated and customized learning
experience, rather than a standard textbook, and textbook publishers are
moving beyond their traditional role to become tutors as well.
    Customers used to interact with Nike once a year to buy running shoes,
and that interaction was actually with a shoe retailer, not Nike. Now,
customers purchase a wellness system that includes a chip embedded in the
shoes, software that analyzes their latest workout, and a social network with
other Nike runners for support. Customers interact daily with Nike,
allowing the company to transform itself from shoe manufacturer to
purveyor of health and fitness services, and to coach customers to achieve
their goals.
    Millions of consumers have embraced wearable technologies and let
devices such as Apple Watch or FitBit track their daily lives. Some extreme
users, also known as quantified selves, are measuring every aspect of their
bodies, from glucose levels to body weight to nutrition to sleep cycles.
When Apple knows more about a patient than her doctor, this has major
implications for the health care industry. Many digital delivery systems are
integrating this data stream with the patient’s electronic medical record. In
the old days, patients and doctors would see each other during periodic
visits. Now, changes in body weight or blood pressure and medication
compliance are reported to the care provider daily, prompting timely action
triggered by abnormalities in the data feed. At the cutting edge, firms like
Medtronic have gone one step further. Some implanted devices not only
track health data and communicate it but are even smart enough to take
action automatically when they detect abnormal patterns in clinically
relevant variables.
    As you might have noticed, there are two common threads to these
developments. First, firms are fundamentally changing how they connect
with their customers. Rather than having episodic interactions, firms are
striving to be connected in a continuous way, providing services and
products as the needs of customers arise, sometimes even before customers
have become aware of their own needs. These firms create a connected
relationship with their customers.
    Second, firms not only address a wider range of needs, they do it at
lower costs. For most of its business, Amazon doesn’t need expensive retail
outlets; the customized, artificial intelligence–based tutoring by McGraw-
Hill forgoes expensive instructors; the motivation to achieve goals in Nike’s
system is created by a peer-based network, not personal trainers; and the
implanted medical devices that automatically take action also save money
by avoiding hospitalizations. The potential of connected strategies is to
create customer experiences that feel like magic while improving
operational efficiency to enhance financial success.
   Given their tremendous potential, connected strategies create great
opportunities for you—but also for all of your current and future
competitors! Connected strategies will lead to disruption in many industries.
At a time when a mobility platform is valued more than some of the biggest
car companies in the world, increases in connectivity can often be seen
more as a threat than an opportunity. But, in almost any industry, potentially
disruptive threats come and go, and at any given moment you might fear
disruption from a dozen different new ventures. Which ventures will
survive? Which ones are truly disruptive? We hope that the frameworks and
tools in this book will not only help you in creating your own connected
strategy but also provide you with a new perspective, allowing you to
separate technological hype from true strategic challenges.
   What is a connected strategy? What tools and frameworks can you use to
build one for your organization? How does it help you create a competitive
advantage? What are great examples to learn from? Answers to these
questions are at the heart of this book.
                                     1

            The Connected Strategy
                 Framework


A good way to start understanding connected strategy is to consider the
traditional relationship between customers and companies. Traditional
interactions start when customers realize they have an unmet need. This
need could be the desire to see Mickey Mouse and ride a roller coaster, the
dream of mastering financial accounting, or the urge to get into shape
before summer arrives. Customers then figure out how they want to fulfill
this need. They browse theme parks on Expedia, they look for accounting
books at Barnes & Noble, or they consult with friends or the local gym on
how to train for a triathlon.
   At some point, customers attain a level of knowledge that sparks action
to put some money on the table. They book a ticket to Disneyland, they buy
an expensive textbook, or they sign up for a weeklong training camp. But
there is considerable friction in the traditional transaction: customers spend
a significant amount of effort to search, request, and receive the product or
service they desire.
   Firms sit on the other end of these traditional transactions. Yes, they can
use marketing dollars to influence the customer along the journey to place
an order, but they have limited connections to that customer. Their episodic
interactions start only once the customer has placed an order, and they end
on delivery of the product.
   In traditional interactions, firms work hard to provide high-quality
products and services as quickly as possible and at a competitive cost. They
manage and perfect their marketing and operations within the model of
episodic sales, but they are inherently limited by the lack of deep
connections with their customers. Traditional episodic interactions between
customers and firms usually require customers to invest significant effort in
figuring out a solution to their needs, then requesting and receiving the
product or service. Moreover, there often exists a gap between what the
customer wants and what the firm provides. This gap can be a temporal gap
(the customer must wait), or a gap between what the customer really wants
and what the firm has to offer.
   A firm that is able to move from episodic interactions with its customers
to a connected relationship overcomes these shortfalls. Consider again the
power of the MagicBand. Disney used to have only a handful of
interactions with its visitors, and those happened at well-defined intervals—
when they came to the park and bought a ticket, or when they ordered
cheeseburgers at the restaurant. Now, sensors track the guests via their
MagicBand every step and every second. The MagicBand not only reduces
the effort in ordering and receiving cheeseburgers or souvenirs, it tailors the
experience by making suggestions to the visitor.
   Similarly, McGraw-Hill originally interacted with a reader only when
selling a book, and even that connection was delegated to a retailer, similar
to the case of Nike. But today, every time the reader looks at the book or
tackles a practice problem, a connection is established that allows the
publisher to learn about the reader, curate its offering, and coach the student
when he or she is stuck. Meanwhile, in health care, the connected strategy
moves the doctor-patient relationship from an episodic encounter every few
months to a continuous flow of data from the patient to the care team,
enabling medical needs to be addressed before they become severe.
   Moving away from episodic interactions toward a connected relationship
turns a theme park into a magical experience, transforms a book publisher
into a creator of learning journeys, and revamps a hospital system into a
proactive care organization. Such deeply connected relationships create
more loyalty and higher profits.
   Connected strategies don’t just happen; they need to be carefully
designed. They have two key elements: a connected customer relationship
and a connected delivery model. The connected customer relationship is
what delights the customer. The connected delivery model is what allows
the firm to create these relationships at low cost. Each connected customer
relationship and delivery model is the result of strategic choices along
several design dimensions. Let’s look at these in figure 1-1.
FIGURE 1-1

The connected strategy




    At the heart of the connected strategy is the connected relationship
between customers and a firm. We find it helpful to think about four design
dimensions of a connected customer relationship, which we will refer to as
the four Rs of connected relationships. First, the information that flows
from the customer to the firm allows either party to recognize a customer
need. Once a need is recognized, the customer or firm identifies a product
or service that would satisfy this need, leading to a request for a desired
option. In turn, this triggers the firm to respond, creating a customized, low-
friction customer experience. By interacting with customers frequently, a
firm is able to repeat the interactions with its customers, allowing it to
continually refine the cycle of recognize-request-respond and to convert
episodic interactions into a true relationship with its customers.
    To create connected customer relationships in a cost-efficient way, a firm
needs to create a connected delivery model. The delivery model is the result
of three key strategic decisions. First, the firm has to decide whom to
connect with whom in its ecosystem. What connections need to be created
between and among its suppliers, its customers, and itself? We call this the
connection architecture. Second, the firm has to decide how money will
flow through this architecture, allowing it to monetize the value that results
from breaking the trade-off between customer happiness and efficiency: it
has to design a revenue model. Lastly, the firm has to make a range of
technological choices that facilitate all the elements of a connected strategy.
It has to decide on its technology infrastructure.
    This book is designed to help you both understand and create connected
strategies for your own organization. We have structured the book into three
parts. In part I, we show in detail how connected strategies allow you to
break your existing trade-off between customer happiness and efficiency.
Part II helps you understand how to build connected customer relationships.
Finally, in part III, we describe how to build a connected delivery model.
Each part concludes with a chapter we call a workshop. In these workshops,
we offer exercises that have been tested and refined with executive
education audiences. These workshops will help you assess your firm’s
current activities and create your own connected strategy.
   To provide you with a road map of what lies ahead, here is a brief
preview.
Part I: The Rewards of Connected
Strategies
In chapter 2, “Breaking the Trade-off between Superior Customer
Experience and Lowering Costs,” we discuss several case studies that
illustrate how connected strategies can overcome the trade-off between
customer happiness and efficiency—a trade-off that is foundational to most
traditional strategic planning frameworks. By tracking guests in a theme
park, selling smart books, and taking care of patients’ health rather than
thinking of them as appointment slots, a connected strategy creates value by
breaking the existing trade-offs between the value that a customer receives
and the cost that the firm incurs. The reward of a connected strategy is
providing more value to the customer at a lower cost to the firm.
    We explain how current innovations in the grocery retail sector,
including meal-kit delivery services, augmented reality displays, and stores
without checkout lines, are increasing both customer satisfaction and
efficiencies.
    Using a detailed case study of the ride-hailing industry, we then discuss
how firms such as Uber and Lyft not only have improved the passenger
experience compared with cab companies but are able to do this at much
lower fulfillment costs. By connecting passengers with drivers, ride-hailing
companies have created a market for driving services. Further, by allowing
prices to vary depending on supply and demand, drivers are given an
incentive to work when and where it is most valuable. Matching supply
with demand in a dynamic world requires new forms of connectivity that
extend well beyond a person jumping into the street to flag a cab or calling
a grumpy dispatcher to send a taxi. Once that connectivity is put in place,
resources can be used much more efficiently.
    We finish the chapter by discussing how connected strategies can lead to
competitive advantage and by reflecting on the importance of data privacy
in the context of connected strategies.
    Chapter 3, titled “Workshop 1: Using Connectivity to Provide Superior
Customer Experiences at Lower Costs,” contains a series of worksheets that
will start you on the process of creating a connected strategy for your
organization.
Part II: Creating Connected
Customer Relationships
In part II of the book, we analyze in depth how you can create a connected
relationship with your customers—a relationship in which episodic
interactions are replaced by frequent, low-friction, and customized
interactions enabled by rich data exchange.
   In chapter 4, “Recognize, Request, and Respond: Building Connected
Customer Experiences,” we investigate the first three design dimensions of
a connected relationship. The dimension of recognize encapsulates the
information flow between the customer and firm that leads to the
recognition of a customer need. We discuss various ways in which you can
shape this information flow: this flow might be initiated by the customer, or
it might be autonomous. Once the information reaches the firm, the firm
needs to interpret and convert it (or help the customer to convert it) into a
request for a desired option. Lastly, the firm needs to respond to this request
and fulfill the desired option in a low-friction manner. This full interaction
between customer and firm creates a connected customer experience.
Through our research, we have identified four different types of connected
customer experiences. These are:

      Respond-to-desire
      Curated offering
      Coach behavior
      Automatic execution

   Let’s take a look at each, returning to our examples from the prologue.
Amazon is a great case of what we call a respond-to-desire connected
customer experience. Once the customer expresses a need, Amazon
responds rapidly and conveniently. At Disney, a key function of the
MagicBand is to create a respond-to-desire experience. When a customer
wants to enter a ride, pay for a cheeseburger, or open her hotel room, a
swipe with the MagicBand is all that is needed.
    The McGraw-Hill textbook example illustrates curated offering. Having
many interactions with each customer allows the firm to learn about the
customer’s needs. With that knowledge and trust, the customer is no longer
alone in finding solutions. Here, the firm and the customer look for
solutions jointly. McGraw-Hill does not just help the student figure out the
corporate valuation problem on page 247, but instead detects that the
student is still struggling with net present value calculations and asks him to
repeat the content on page 35.
    Companies that create connected strategies often create more than one
connected customer experience. Returning to our Disney example, it’s clear
that the MagicBand does more than create a respond-to-desire experience.
With the MagicBand, the customer can communicate a decision that she no
longer wants to take a ride on Magic Mountain. Instead, she tells Disney (or
Disney knows from past experience) that she wants to experience an action
ride and a yummy meal in the next two hours. Disney then takes this
information and creates a personalized itinerary. Moreover, Disney is even
able to customize the experience of different rides. For instance, if a visitor
has created an avatar in one of Disney’s video games, this avatar will appear
on the “Wanted” poster that the visitor sees during the Pirates of the
Caribbean ride.
    We call the third type of connected customer experience coach behavior.
Firms like Nike try to change the behavior of customers toward what is
good, smart, or healthy. Nike does not force you to go running more often,
but it can offer to help you achieve your fitness and health goals. Similarly,
the virtual tutor in a smart textbook says, “Jeremy, you have not yet
completed the assigned readings for this week,” just as a wearable device
starts vibrating if its owner has not left his office chair for the last few
hours.
    Connected devices that let health care providers intervene even before an
urgent need has arisen and implanted devices that are able to take
independent actions are examples of the automatic execution connected
customer experience. A cardiologist is consulted the moment an arrhythmia
is recorded by the heart-rate monitor. A digital photo album is created and
sent to the customer based on many shots taken in the theme park, all done
without the customer ever noticing a camera. As with many connected
strategies, these deep connections can raise privacy issues, as they sit in a
gray zone between Big Brother and parental love. We will explore these
issues throughout the book. And, just to be clear, we don’t see this as the
vision for all connected customer experiences, though most of our students
would happily permit textbooks to take their exams for them …
   While these individual customer experiences already create a lot of
value, once a firm is able to repeat these interactions, it has the ability to
substantially refine the customer experience over time. A firm with a
connected strategy is able to transform a series of customer experiences into
a connected relationship with its customers—a key condition for a firm to
create a competitive advantage. This transformation is the topic of chapter
5, “Repeat: Building Customer Relationships to Create Competitive
Advantage.”
   We believe that many connected customer experiences will become table
stakes in the future. That is why the repeat dimension is so important. It is
through this dimension—the ability of firms to learn from existing
interactions in order to shape future interactions—that firms will be able to
create a sustainable competitive advantage. The repeat dimension helps
firms with two forms of learning.
   First, at the level of a particular customer, a firm learns how to better
match the needs of this customer with the firm’s existing products and
services. Disney learns that Jing seems to like ice cream more than fries and
theater performances more than rides, so it is able to create a more
enjoyable itinerary for her. McGraw-Hill learns that Jeremy struggles with
compound-interest calculations, and is able to direct his attention to
material that covers exactly that weakness. Netflix learns that Venkat likes
political satire, and can make more pertinent suggestions to him of what
movies he would enjoy.
   Second, beyond this customer-specific learning, the firm can engage in
population-level learning, allowing it to adjust its existing portfolio of
products and services. Disney learns that the general demand for frozen
yogurt is increasing, so it can add more stands serving frozen yogurt.
McGraw-Hill learns that many students struggle with compound-interest
calculations, so it refines its online module on this topic. Netflix observes
that many viewers like political dramas, so it licenses additional series in
this genre. Moreover, population-level learning may allow a firm to know
more about its customers than any of its suppliers do, thereby enabling it to
create new products and services. Having deeper customer insight allows
McGraw-Hill’s content producers to add new educational experiences, and
Netflix to move into movie production itself.
    Over time, these two levels of learning have another very important
effect: firms are able to address more fundamental needs of customers.
McGraw-Hill might learn that its customer wants not just to learn financial
accounting but in fact to make a career on Wall Street. Nike might find out
that a particular runner is interested not just in keeping fit but also in
training to run a first marathon. This knowledge can lead to opportunities to
create an even wider range of services and to trust relationships between
firms and customers that become very hard to break by competitors. To
build these trusted relationships, customer data needs to be used in
transparent and secure ways, a topic we return to at the end of chapter 5.
    Chapter 6, “Workshop 2: Building Connected Customer Relationships,”
concludes part II of the book by guiding you through a series of exercises
that will assist you in creating connected customer relationships.
Part III: Creating Connected
Delivery Models
Once you have an idea of the type of connected relationship you want to
design for your customers, the question is how to implement this
relationship in a cost-effective way. You need to create a connected delivery
model. These models consist of three parts, which form the subjects of the
next three chapters.




             HOW THIS BOOK CAME TO BE
At the Wharton School, both of us teach in the MBA and executive
education programs, and we are codirectors of the Mack Institute for
Innovation Management. In the last few years, as new and existing firms
disrupted their industries by fundamentally changing how they connect with
their customers, we have begun to think about the principles underlying
their success. At the same time, more and more managers have come to
Wharton Executive Education to learn how to create opportunities for their
own businesses using these principles. As a result, we set out both to help
managers navigate the world of the Internet of Things, the sharing
economy, platform strategies, deep learning, fintech (financial technology),
and so on, and to provide them with a tool kit to create connected strategies
for their own organizations. Our thinking was sharpened and refined
through hundreds of sessions with executives and MBA students. The
stories they shared of their own experiences and challenges were essential
feedback as we developed the framework we now call connected strategy.
The book you hold in your hands (or read on the screen) is the result.
   As in any research, we have stood on the shoulders of giants. We have
greatly benefited from the broad-ranging research by Michael E. Porter,
who has investigated the impact of the internet and new technologies on
strategy for a long time. The work by Adam M. Brandenburger, Harborne
W. Stuart Jr., and Barry J. Nalebuff had an important influence on our
discussion of value and willingness-to-pay in chapter 2, while the customer
journey we discuss in chapter 4 has its intellectual foundation in the work
by Ian C. McMillan and Rita Gunther McGrath. The insightful work by
Andrew McAfee and Erik Brynjolfsson on the impact of new technologies
on firms and society has always been stimulating for us. Finally, we have
been inspired by our friends, colleagues, and coauthors David Asch and
Kevin Volpp, whose pioneering work on hovering over patients while
outside the hospital has influenced our thinking on connected customer
relationships. Obviously, many others have influenced our thinking and
work. For readers who would like to dive deeper into the related academic
and applied literature, we have compiled a detailed sources section at the
end of the book.


   In chapter 7, “Designing Connection Architectures,” we lay out different
ways in which firms can reshape the network of connections among the
various players in their ecosystems. Ride-hailing firms such as Uber and
Lyft have created connections between previously unconnected parties:
individuals with cars and individuals looking for a ride. Such a
configuration of the value chain has its advantages, but there are many
alternatives. In the world of mobility, Daimler has decided to create its own
car-sharing service (Car2Go), forming a direct connection between a
manufacturer and customers. In contrast, Zipcar, another car-sharing
operation, has connections to both car manufacturers and renters, as it has to
purchase cars before it can rent them out. Finally, ride-sharing service
BlaBlaCar operates a peer-to-peer network of drivers who offer each other
rides whenever an empty seat is available.




          CONNECTED STRATEGY VERSUS
             PLATFORM STRATEGY
The last couple of years have witnessed an enormous success of so-called
platform strategies. Connected strategies are different from platform
strategies; in fact, you can create value with connected strategies without
being a platform.
    Platform businesses are not directly involved in serving customers by
providing them with goods or services. Instead, their focus is on connecting
the producers and customers of such products or services. For example,
Uber does not own cars. It connects drivers and their cars with passengers
who want a ride. Apple’s app store primarily does not sell Apple software.
It connects app developers and their software with customers who want to
use it. Rather than owning real estate, Airbnb focuses on connecting folks
who have empty rooms, apartments, or houses with travelers in need.
    A platform really serves two sets of customers. First are those who
provide the products or services that are transacted on the platform, be it
app developers, drivers, or landlords. And second are those who consume
those products or services, such as owners of smartphones, passengers, and
travelers. Platform businesses need to appeal to both sets, which is why they
are often called two-sided markets. Success is typically achieved by
providing a platform for payment, trust building, and dispute resolution and
by providing liquidity to the market, making sure there are enough
customers to make it worth the providers’ effort to join the platform and
vice versa.
    Though platforms crucially depend on connectivity and are an important
design element of our connected strategy framework, they differ along the
following important dimensions:

           Platforms are a particular type of what we call connection
           architecture. Connected strategy, however, also involves creating
           a connected customer relationship. For instance, Disney has
           created strongly connected relationships with its customers, but
           most of us would not refer to Disney as a platform.
           With the success (and hype) around platforms, the term has
           unfortunately become rather diffuse and is applied to many
           different models. As we will see in chapter 5, platform is really
           an umbrella term for several different connection architectures.
           When Amazon, a platform company, sells through its own
           warehouses, billions of dollars of fixed assets in real estate,
           buildings, and logistics are involved. When Amazon facilitates a
           sale through its Marketplace platform, none of these assets is
          involved. These are very different business models! Similarly,
          while Airbnb and Facebook are both platforms, one is
          connecting customers to individuals who serve as suppliers (of
          accommodation), whereas the other connects individuals who do
          not engage in a business transaction. Again, these are very
          different connection architectures that will require, for instance,
          very different revenue models.
          On most platforms, the relationship between customers and
          providers is primarily a transactional one, and the revenue model
          of the platform is to take a cut from these transactions. In
          contrast, the ultimate goal of connected strategies is to transform
          episodic transactions into long-term customer relationships
          precisely to avoid transactional pricing.

   In sum, platforms and platform strategies are related to connected
strategies and also can be an element of a connected strategy. Yet
connectivity allows for many other forms of value creation than the
formation of two-sided markets, and it is the aim of a connected strategy to
take advantage of them.


   When implementing a connected strategy, you need to decide how much
of the customer experience your firm will generate internally and how much
you will delegate to other partners in the ecosystem. Moreover, you may
have to create new connections between players in your ecosystem. Chapter
7 provides guidance on these decisions. As we will see, there are five
common connection architectures that are used across industries:

     Connected producer
     Connected retailer
     Connected market maker
     Crowd orchestrator
     Peer-to-peer network creator
    In chapter 7, we will describe each of these connection architectures in
detail. By recognizing these, you can make the right choices for your
business.
    We finish the chapter by introducing the connected strategy matrix. We
have found this matrix to be a very valuable framework for systematically
cataloging the various activities of your competitors in your industry, as
well as an innovation tool to create new ideas for your own connected
strategy.
    Chapter 8, “Revenue Models for Connected Strategies,” adds the second
design consideration for your connected delivery model: the revenue model.
Some connected strategies can rely on traditional revenue models. Disney,
in its theme park division, is still making most of its money from admission
tickets, food, merchandise, and fees for special experiences inside the park.
Contrast this with Niantic and Nintendo, two companies that also produce
amazing experiences centered on fictitious characters. With Pokémon Go,
the partners have leveraged augmented reality to create a technology
platform that turns any place into a virtual theme park. You can play it
anywhere, anytime, and you can play it for free, together with its other
sixty-five million active users. Niantic creates revenues through in-app
purchases that enhance the game and through sponsorships by firms that
create desirable locations for the game (e.g., Starbucks and McDonald’s).
    Technological advances are often what make connected strategies
economically feasible. Of course, everyone would like to have personalized,
on-demand services that fulfill the most fundamental needs. But how can
firms offer such customized services at affordable prices? Vast
improvements along many dimensions, from data gathering, data
transmission, and data storage to data analysis, logistics, and
manufacturing, have made connected strategies a possibility. In chapter 9,
“Technology Infrastructure for Connected Strategies,” we will help you sift
through these advances. By coming back to the connected relationships that
you have designed in part II, we can identify key technologies and
systematically ask which of these technologies will enable you to further
advance your connected strategy.
    Finally, chapter 10, “Workshop 3: Building Your Connected Delivery
Model,” presents a series of exercises and tools that will allow you not only
to build your own connected strategy but also to get a better understanding
of what is happening around you in your industry.
   The concepts just introduced allow us now to formally define a
connected strategy:

      A firm’s connected strategy is a set of operational and technological
      choices that fundamentally changes

           how the firm connects to its customers by implementing the
           recognize-request-respond-repeat loop, which transforms
           episodic interactions into continuous relationships with low
           friction and high degree of customization, and
           what connections the firm creates among the various players in
           its ecosystem through the type of connection architecture it
           chooses and the subsequent economic value captured through a
           revenue model.




      BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS CONNECTED
                STRATEGIES
Connected strategies are arising in both business-to-consumer and business-
to-business settings. Consider Rolls-Royce’s transition from a simple seller
of aircraft engines to a much broader service provider enabled by deeper
connectivity. Today’s aircraft engines are packed with sensors that generate
gigabytes of data. This data allows Rolls-Royce to have a precise
understanding at the level of individual parts within an engine. While
previously parts such as a fuel pump would be replaced on a fixed schedule,
now Rolls-Royce can replace pumps earlier or later depending on the state
of the pump. This creates significant cost savings either by avoiding engine
problems and subsequent flight delays (if a pump was previously replaced
too late) or by being able to use a pump longer than normally. The ability to
deliver preventative maintenance has allowed Rolls-Royce to change its
revenue model from selling engines to selling flying hours, aligning
incentives between itself and its customers. Moreover, when engines are
decommissioned and returned, Rolls-Royce knows the exact performance
profile of each part and is able to recover 50 percent of the materials to
remanufacture them for use as new components, reducing manufacturing
costs. Being able to aggregate data across a customer’s fleet allows Rolls-
Royce to gain further insights. For instance, a clean engine burns less fuel,
but washing engines is costly. Using fleet-level data, Rolls-Royce is able to
determine the optimum time for each engine in a fleet to get washed.
Finally, by adding additional data sources such as technical logs, flight
plans, forecasts, and actual weather data, Rolls-Royce is able to provide
insights to its customers for how to increase fuel efficiency—for instance,
through improved flight schedules. Through its connected strategy, Rolls-
Royce has increased the value it delivers to its customers while at the same
time increasing its own efficiency.
How to Use This Book
Probably you are reading this book not just for your entertainment but
rather with the intent of reflecting on how your organization creates
connections to your customers and suppliers. We get it. That’s why we
wrote this book neither as an academic textbook nor as a scholarly treatise.
The main purpose of our writing is to help you design your own connected
strategy so that you can create a competitive advantage for your firm.
    At the end of each part of this book, we want to pause and help you
apply all the frameworks in the form of a workshop. Each workshop
consists of worksheets and guiding questions that we have road-tested with
a large number of our executive education participants. Use them on your
own, or even better, use them to engage your team members and other
stakeholders in a structured workshop.
    On the website for this book, connected-strategy.com, you can find more
information on how to run your own workshop. The site has suggested
timelines for the workshops, as well as downloadable templates of all
exercises and group assignments. We also provide you with a number of
filled-out examples for the worksheets that will be useful as you apply the
tools we present in this book. Lastly, the website hosts dozens of podcasts
featuring executives from a wide array of industries, from consulting to
education and from banking to security services.
    To illustrate our ideas and frameworks in this book, we use many
examples from firms around the world. Some of these examples will
hopefully spark ideas for your own organization. At the same time, we want
to be clear about one thing: we certainly do not expect all the firms we
mention to emerge as winners in their industries. Frankly, we would be
extremely surprised if they did. The world of connected strategy is
developing, and many new winners and losers will be created. We believe
in the power of the ideas we present in this book, but we are not offering
investment tips for particular firms.
    Whether you are a startup trying to disrupt an existing industry, or an
incumbent firm that wants to revitalize its strategy and defend its business,
whether you deal directly with end customers, or are in a business-to-
business setting, we believe connected strategies will play a pivotal role in
helping you achieve competitive advantage. If you don’t think about
connected strategies, someone else in your industry most likely will!
    PART ONE




THE REWARDS OF
  CONNECTED
  STRATEGIES
                                     2

             Breaking the Trade-off
               between Superior
             Customer Experience
              and Lowering Costs


Every business in every industry faces a trade-off between the quality of the
customer experience and the costs of providing it. Adding a glass of
champagne and extra legroom on an airplane makes for better travel, but it
also increases costs. An electric car with a Tesla-style 85-kilowatt-hour
battery can go faster and longer between recharging cycles, but it also costs
more than the Nissan Leaf’s 30-kilowatt-hour battery. A hotel providing
personal concierge service leads to a superior customer experience
compared with a surly desk clerk handing out local maps. In short, superior
customer experiences come at the price of higher fulfillment costs. How can
that be changed?
   This chapter explores the fundamental promise of connected strategies:
by creating deeper connections with customers and new connections
between various players in an industry, firms can create new business
models that redefine the existing trade-off between customer experience and
cost. To illustrate our ideas, we look at case studies from grocery retail and
ride hailing.
The Efficiency Frontier
To see how connected strategies completely upend the traditional cost-
quality trade-off, consider supermarkets, a $600 billion industry in the
United States, $500 billion in India, and more than $700 billion in China.
Sam, a typical shopper, is thinking about his weekly grocery trip to buy
dairy, meat, and vegetables. Traditionally, Sam considers three options: a
local farmers’ market, a supermarket chain such as Safeway or Tesco, and a
discount market such as Aldi. What factors drive Sam’s choices? Perhaps
for Sam, his happiness will be most affected by the quality of the available
products. For instance, at the farmers’ market, the produce is organic, the
meat is fresh, and the dairy comes from happy cows. Beyond the product
attributes (e.g., organic vs. nonorganic), additional factors affect a
customer’s happiness. There are lots of ways to delight a customer, and
there can be many pain points that detract from the customer experience.
For instance, do customers have to drive for long to do their grocery
shopping, or can they walk there? If they have to drive, how easy is it for
them to find parking? How long will it take to find all the items that they
want? How long will it take to pay? The list goes on.
    There are many dimensions that drive how much a customer likes a
product or service, including performance, features, customization, ease of
access, waiting time, ease of use, and so on. We lump all of these together
into a single score (think of it as a grade point average) and label this score
the willingness-to-pay of the customer. The more you like something, the
higher the maximum price you would be willing to pay for it. Economists
often refer to customer utility, which captures the same concept. It is
important to distinguish between the willingness-to-pay that a customer has
for a particular product and the actual price that a customer pays for this
product. The price for a particular product will depend not only on the
customer’s willingness-to-pay for this product but also on the willingness-
to-pay that competitors create for their products and the prices they charge.
FIGURE 2-1

Efficiency frontier




    To become more attractive to customers, firms want to increase their
customers’ willingness-to-pay. But there is a countervailing force: the cost
of creating and fulfilling such a customer experience, which we refer to as
fulfillment costs. The better the quality of the product, or the more
conveniently located the location, the higher the overall cost of fulfilling
this customer experience. We can visualize this trade-off by plotting firms
on a graph that has the customer’s willingness-to-pay on the vertical axis
and the fulfillment costs for the firm on the horizontal axis. In figure 2-1,
we have plotted Sam’s three grocery options. The farmers’ market lives in
the upper left of the graph. It creates high willingness-to-pay for customers,
but its fulfillment costs are also very high, since small farms do not have
scale economies in production or distribution. Costs drop as we move from
left to right on the cost axis. As a result, the discount market is on the lower
right. Costs are low, but willingness-to-pay for this option is also low.
Supermarkets exist in between the extremes.
    When we connect the dots representing the firms that are farthest out on
this graph, we get the current efficiency frontier for this industry. This line
represents the frontier because firms on this line have maximized the
willingness-to-pay they have created for customers for a given cost level.
Conversely, for a given level of willingness-to-pay, these firms have
minimized the costs at which they can create this willingness-to-pay. Firms
that are not on the frontier are at a severe disadvantage. They face
competitors who can either create a higher willingness-to-pay while
incurring the same cost or create the same willingness-to-pay at a lower
cost. In either case, the competitor is able to provide the customer with a
better deal: either a preferable product at the same price or the same product
at a lower price. The efficiency frontier also illustrates that firms face a
trade-off: once the firm has reached the existing frontier, higher
willingness-to-pay will come at higher cost; or, conversely, cost reductions
will lead to lower willingness-to-pay.
Pushing Out the Efficiency Frontier
Despite countless cooking shows on television, consumers in most
developed nations have lost their appetite for spending a lot of time on meal
preparation. This has led to the emergence of an entirely new product
category, enabled by the internet and low transportation costs: kits that
contain the ingredients for meals in customized portion sizes, delivered
right to the doorsteps of subscribers. In the United States, Blue Apron
initially dominated this market segment, leading to an almost $2 billion
valuation in its IPO in 2017. Launched first in Germany, HelloFresh has
since surpassed Blue Apron in this category. Most recently, supermarket
chains such as Walmart and Albertsons have joined the party. And, you
probably guessed it, wherever there is money to be made online, Amazon is
not far behind—the company now sells meal kits through Amazon Fresh.
    As with any case study that you will see in this book, we are not
endorsing particular companies, and you should certainly not use our work
to pick the next stocks you buy. Blue Apron has struggled financially since
its IPO, and Uber, to be discussed later in this chapter, has had its own share
of legal and financial challenges. Whatever might happen to these
companies, we believe that subscription-based meal-kit deliveries and ride
hailing are here to stay. The fact that both Blue Apron and Uber are facing
fierce competition is tough for them as individual companies, but it
demonstrates the vibrancy of the newly created market segments and thus
underlines the potency of their connected business models. We will speak
more about connected strategy and competitive advantage toward the end of
the chapter.
    How do companies such as Blue Apron operate? Customers who sign up
for a Blue Apron subscription are asked to specify their preferences. From
then on, every week, Blue Apron sends the customer a box containing
ingredients and recipes. Blue Apron sources sustainable produce directly
from smaller, often family-owned farms. All of the meats and seafood that
Blue Apron provides are free of hormones and antibiotics. Quite often, Blue
Apron will also include ingredients that are not very well known, such as
fairy tale eggplants or pink lemons. Blue Apron’s agroecologists advise
farmers on crop rotation, planting dates, plant spacing, and pest
management in order to enable them to cultivate unusual varieties of
produce, yielding richer harvests and sustainable farming.
    Why do so many customers sign up for this service? On the product side,
its high-quality and sustainably sourced products put it on a relatively even
level with products from a farmers’ market. In addition, Blue Apron raised
customers’ willingness-to-pay by reducing a number of pain points along
the customer journey. There is no need to spend time looking for recipes, to
make a shopping list, to drive to several stores to find all the unique items,
or to wait in line to pay. There are no leftover ingredients rotting in the
fridge. On top of these advantages, customers learn how to cook unique
meals with novel ingredients that they might not have used otherwise and
might have had a hard time finding in stores. In sum, for many customers,
the willingness-to-pay has increased.
    But how about fulfillment costs? Despite its convenience, Blue Apron
has lower fulfillment costs than a traditional farmers’ market. Part of this
cost advantage results from its massive scale, especially when compared
with traditional farming co-ops. For instance, for some ingredients, such as
the fairy tale eggplant, Blue Apron purchases nearly the entire
commercially available supply.
    As far as retail operations are concerned, the subscription model of Blue
Apron allows the company to forecast demand for ingredients with a high
degree of accuracy. This reduces Blue Apron’s excess inventory. And Blue
Apron does not have to worry about stock-outs, one of the major
operational hassles for supermarkets. If avocados are scarce, the company
can change the recipes of the week and customers will eat asparagus
instead.
    The forecasts also let the company help farmers manage their own
businesses efficiently. Blue Apron often buys the entire crop of a farmer,
providing a more predictable income stream than would be possible if the
farmer attempted to sell a product at farmers’ markets, where demand
varies. Lastly, Blue Apron eliminates two links of the supply chain—
transportation from warehouses to grocery stores, and the grocery store
retail sites themselves—thereby removing real estate, utility, insurance, and
other costs. By creating a curated offering, Blue Apron has pushed up the
willingness-to-pay of its customers. At the same time, by creating new
connections between farmers and customers—a connection architecture we
will call a connected retailer in chapter 7—Blue Apron has also been able to
reduce its fulfillment costs. In sum, Blue Apron has pushed out the
efficiency frontier, as we illustrate in figure 2-2. The dotted line in this
figure corresponds to the increased competitive advantage that Blue Apron
has gained relative to farmers’ markets due to its connected strategy.
   Other connected strategies have arisen in the grocery space, creating an
entirely new frontier in this industry. Consider the same-day delivery
service Instacart. Instacart has focused on one particular pain point, the
shopping itself. Instacart creates new connections between customers who
need groceries and individuals who work as shoppers. It has created a
connection architecture we will call a crowd orchestrator. Using the
Instacart app, customers can shop virtually at a range of local stores,
including grocery stores, pet supply stores, and pharmacies. Paid shoppers
will then go to these stores and pick up the items the customer ordered.
Deliveries can happen in as short as an hour or can be scheduled for later.
This service raises a customer’s willingness-to-pay by saving him or her
time. Given that shoppers can buy for more than one person at a time, the
purchases are done more efficiently, driving down cost. As we depict in
figure 2-3, the main result of Instacart is also a shift of the frontier. In this
case, it pushes up the willingness-to-pay more than it reduces fulfillment
costs.

FIGURE 2-2

Pushing out the efficiency frontier




   Around the world, we are observing a range of experiments that use
connected strategies to raise the willingness-to-pay by improving the
customer experience and simultaneously reducing fulfillment costs. In
India, a number of e-grocers, such as BigBasket, have sprung up that allow
customers to order from over twenty thousand products, including fresh
fruits and vegetables, via an app and have them delivered to their homes.
For a smaller group of essential items, ninety-minute delivery is also
available. Customers’ willingness-to-pay is increased, as the shopping can
be done more quickly, while BigBasket does not have to invest in costly
brick-and-mortar stores.
   In South Korea, Tesco, a grocery retailer based in the United Kingdom
but with extensive global operations, experimented with novel ways to
engage customers in new environments. Tesco faced the challenge of trying
to market itself to young urban professionals who did not have time during
their day to visit stores. Tesco decided to utilize the country’s high degree of
smartphone adoption to reach these customers in places they do frequent:
subway stations. Tesco created virtual stores on the walls of subway stations
using life-size posters depicting grocery store shelves stocked with
products. Customers felt as if they were standing in front of real shelves.
The products featured in the posters displayed QR codes to be scanned by
subway patrons using Tesco’s Homeplus app. Delivery would often be
scheduled for the same day so that purchases arrived as customers got home
from work.
   With its Homeplus app, Tesco created a respond-to-desire relationship,
making it easier to shop for and receive merchandise. Moreover, their
product posters also served as a coach behavior platform, reminding
customers to buy groceries at an otherwise idle time, during their wait for a
subway. By easing the customer journey, Tesco raised the willingness-to-
pay of time-pressed customers relative to traditional grocery shopping. At
the same time, it increased its sales while avoiding the cost of additional
storefront real estate. Putting it all together, we can see that Tesco
Homeplus effectively pushed out the efficiency frontier. It raised the
willingness-to-pay and simultaneously decreased costs (see figure 2-3).
   In China, Alibaba operates an increasing number of Hema supermarkets.
Using the Hema app, customers can buy fresh food from home, have it
prepared by chefs, and then have it delivered to their homes—all in thirty
minutes. For other grocery orders, in-store shoppers fill the customer’s
order, putting the shopping bags on a conveyor belt that carries them to a
delivery center adjacent to the store. If a customer prefers to pick his or her
own food, especially fresh seafood, the customer can come and select it.
Every item has a scannable barcode yielding price and product information,
including the origin and even the backstory on the item. Customers use
Alipay to pay at the checkout stand. Over time, Hema’s app learns the
customer’s preference and creates more customized offerings.

FIGURE 2-3

New efficiency frontier in the grocery industry




    Other shopping innovations include stores that have no checkout lines at
all. Instead, cameras follow customers and automatically tally up the
products that they remove from shelves. Both Amazon, with its Amazon Go
stores, and JD in China are pursuing this. Customers’ willingness-to-pay is
raised through reduced checkout hassles, while costs are reduced by
lowering labor costs.
    As our shopping trip around the globe reveals, grocers face a trade-off
between customer delight, as captured in their willingness-to-pay, and
fulfillment costs. Successful retailers should not accept the existing trade-
off; they should break it.
The New Efficiency Frontier in
Mobility
To see in more detail how connected strategies can relax the traditional
trade-off between cost and quality, let us move from the world of grocery
retailing to the world of mobility and take a deep dive into the ride-hailing
industry. From Didi in China, Careem in the Middle East, Ola in India,
Grab in Malaysia, and Yandex in Russia, to Uber and Lyft in the United
States, these companies have fundamentally changed how people think
about getting around town.




       PARETO DOMINANCE AND SHIFTING
          THE EFFICIENCY FRONTIER
A strategy is said to Pareto dominate another if it can achieve both higher
willingness-to-pay and lower costs. Thus, Pareto dominance is at the heart
of our definition of the efficiency frontier. Every airline executive likes
airplanes that provide passengers with big seats and that are inexpensive to
operate. Those airplanes—economists also call them “production
technologies”—Pareto dominate the ones with small seats and high
operating expenses. Typically, however, airline executives have to choose
between airplanes that have large seats and high costs and those that have
small seats and low costs. If those are the only options, neither Pareto
dominates the other and so both of them can be on the efficiency frontier.
Which production technologies to choose from the efficiency frontier can
be difficult to determine and will depend on market segmentation and firm
strategy. (See the sources section for information on the related role of
Pareto dominance and the efficient frontier in finance.)
   The promise of connected strategy is that management does not have to
limit its attention to making choices from among technologies that define
the current efficiency frontier. Instead, we argue that by forming connected
customer relationships and by using connectivity to create new connection
architectures and new revenue models, it is possible to change the
efficiency frontier. Consequently, successful implementations of connected
strategy create Pareto-dominating strategic options—happy customers at
lower fulfillment costs.


   The reason why ride-hailing services have gained so much popularity is
that they most often provide a better service to their customers than
traditional taxis and do so at lower costs. Ride hailing has shifted the
efficiency frontier in the mobility industry.
   To see how ride-hailing services have pushed out the efficiency frontier,
we can ask the following two distinct questions that go to the heart of
connected strategies:

        1. How can we change the way we connect with our customers?
           How can we deepen the connections between the company,
           drivers, and customers? The parties being connected in this case
           remain the same, but the depth of their connections is increased,
           leading to lower costs and a superior customer experience. In
           essence, we put bigger information pipes between the existing
           entities.
        2. Can we change whom we connect? A typical cab company has
           a fleet of some fifty to five hundred vehicles to meet demand.
           Ride-hailing services, in contrast, have many thousands of
           privately owned vehicles available in metropolitan areas.
           Moreover, they can rely on crowdsourcing to ensure the quality
           of their drivers, as opposed to relying on government regulators
           to take on the task of vetting them. This second case is one of
           connecting entities that previously were not connected—that is,
           putting in new information pipes.
Creating Deeper Connections among
Existing Parties
To understand how deeper connections among existing parties can create
more value, let’s summarize the pain points from the perspective of the
customer and the inefficiencies from the perspective of the drivers. In
chapter 4, we will more formally introduce the concept of a customer
journey and how to spot such pain points. For now, let’s just see what a
customer prefers about a ride-hailing company compared to a taxi cab—that
is, how ride-hailing companies have pushed up the willingness-to-pay of
customers:

      Convenient ordering: Using an app is far easier than hailing a cab
      from a street corner, calling a dispatcher, or lining up at a taxi stand.
      All of these require a fair bit of customer effort; hence, none of these
      modes is particularly customer friendly. This is especially true at the
      busiest hours for cabs. For example, in New York City, 70 percent of
      the cabs are utilized on Thursday evenings.
      Convenient payment: With cabs, each transaction begins with the
      pickup and ends with the drop-off. No payment information is stored
      beyond this. Ride-hailing companies do not require the customer to
      carry cash or to deal with (possibly broken) credit card machines
      within cabs, and payments, including tipping, happen within the app.

   What about the driver? Cab drivers face several operational
inefficiencies that add to the fulfillment costs without increasing the
customer’s willingness-to-pay. The substantial capital outlay for a cab
medallion means that cabs must be in nearly constant use to be profitable.
(Even after the large price drop for a medallion caused by ride-hailing
companies, each taxi that you see in New York has almost as much capital
tied up in it as a Rolls-Royce Phantom!) If run well, ride-hailing companies
can achieve significant advantages in utilization rates. For instance, in New
York, Uber’s utilization rates exceed cab utilization rates by 5 percentage
points. In other metropolitan areas, Uber is able to achieve more than a 20
percentage point advantage in utilization, which reflects three inefficiencies
of cabs:

      Finding a fare: Many cab drivers spend a good chunk of their time
      waiting in line at taxi stands for a passenger. For instance, New York
      cabbies spend 50 percent of their time on the road without a
      passenger.
      Routing: Even worse for the cab’s efficiency is the situation in which
      the driver picks up a fare from a prespecified location. The meter
      starts running only when the customer enters the car. Human
      dispatchers are not only expensive, they are also limited in their
      computational power. Finding the optimal vehicle for a customer
      request requires smart algorithms and connections to the entire fleet in
      the market so that the best-positioned one can be chosen to fill a
      request—something that the cab company lacks and that leads to the
      lower utilization rate just mentioned.
      Payment: At the end of a ride, the passenger pays the driver. This
      might be the most rewarding part of the ride for the driver, but is a
      waste of capacity. Cabs make money from driving, not from standing
      still while waiting to process credit card payments.

    Ride-hailing companies’ success in addressing these customer pain
points and overcoming these inefficiencies is the first reason why they have
been able to provide a superior service at lower costs. This brings us to the
first question of a connected strategy: How can we deepen the connections
between existing parties and get more information through these pipes?
    For cab companies, this question has been answered by a number of
apps, including GetTaxi, Curb, EasyTaxi, MyTaxi, and many more. These
apps aim to improve the connection between a passenger and a cab; in fact,
many of them were launched well before ride-hailing companies entered the
market. Enabling customers to order a cab via the app turns every block in
town into a virtual taxi stand. Also, payment can be streamlined as customer
and company are connected through the download of an app, improving
both the customer experience and the productivity of the driver in the form
of higher utilization. Finally, a fleet management system can be introduced
to connect all cabs in a fleet, enabling better matching between an incoming
customer request and a driver, which reduces the amount of idle time,
further improving driver productivity and utilization.
   This improvement in connectivity is shown in table 2-1. We can think of
the right-hand column in the table as a connected cab company. This
company uses an app to better link to its customers and process payments,
and it tracks its vehicles using GPS.
   The use of technology to create deeper connections with customers can
also be seen in many other examples we discussed previously:

            Using the MagicBand makes food orders at Disney easier for visitors,
            leading to a higher willingness-to-pay, and the entire ordering and
            payment process is fully automated, leading to lower fulfillment
            costs.
            Smart and fully digital textbooks are easier to produce than traditional
            paper books. Their embedded software also makes it easier for the
            school or university to grade homework assignments and exams,
            increasing faculty productivity.
            Many health care systems now (finally) provide something that has
            long been a standard feature in most other industries: online booking
            of an appointment. Rather than going through the annoying and
            complex scheduling over the phone, patients can conveniently book
            appointments online. If more urgent care is needed, some hospitals
            now enable patients to videoconference with their care team directly.
TABLE 2-1

Benefits of creating deeper connections
Connection               Status quo cab                     “Connected cab”

Passenger to vehicle     Flagging, dispatcher, taxi stand   App
Payment                  Cash, credit card                  Automated in-app purchase
Vehicle to vehicle       Dispatcher, two-way radio          GPS tracking, fleet management system
Improvements                                                • More convenient ordering
                                                            • No wasted time for payment
                                                            • Better routing




   Deepening the connections between the existing players can transform a
business. Yet for all the enhancements implemented by the connected cab
company, it is still constrained by its existing connection architecture. Let’s
now look at the second key element of a connected strategy: creating new
connections.
Creating New Connections
The success of ride-hailing companies is not a result of being a better and
more connected cab company. Their success is mostly driven by their
ability to connect previously unconnected parties. Most cities have several
cab companies, each with its own fleet. Ride-hailing companies, in contrast,
do not own and operate vehicles. Instead, they connect individually owned
vehicles throughout town to form a virtual fleet. They merely act as
orchestrators, something that we discuss further in chapter 7. This virtual
fleet is much larger than any cab company could ever be. This makes it
easier for the ride-hailing company to cover the entire town, which
increases the likelihood that a vehicle is close to a customer in need of a
ride, resulting in shorter customer wait times and the higher utilizations
mentioned before. Utilization is further increased because drivers don’t
waste time picking up and dropping off vehicles at the beginning and end of
their shifts, since they simply use their own car.
    Ride hailing and vehicle utilization are also improved through the
practice of surge pricing. Not only are all active drivers for a ride-hailing
company connected, but so are those who are currently inactive, doing other
things. Ride-hailing companies often institute surge pricing in the evenings,
but only at particular times. It often happens in the early evening (when
folks head out), less frequently around eight o’clock at night (when folks
are out), and then peaks at eleven o’clock at night (when folks want to get
home). As passengers, we find surge pricing a nuisance. But it is an
important component of ride hailing, just as revenue management (aka
dynamic pricing) is part of selling airline tickets and hotel rooms.
    Adjusting pricing in real time has two benefits. We are familiar with the
first one from the airlines. Management consultants and other business
executives rarely fly on Saturday afternoon. But the airlines have fixed
capacity and would waste a lot of money if their planes sat idle on Saturday
afternoons, so they offer steep discounts. The same happens in reverse on
Monday morning when the partner in the consulting company really needs
to meet that CEO in Cleveland and is willing to pay double the price. As a
result, our consultant flies on Monday, and the college student heading back
to Ohio State travels on Saturday. Markets are more efficient in the
coordination of resources if they let prices adjust. Because the regulated cab
market does not allow for price adjustments, cab owners cannot imitate this
strategy. Many ride-hailing companies, however, have fully embraced
dynamic pricing.
   In the case of ride hailing, there is another benefit of dynamic pricing.
An airline has a fixed capacity. It would love to have extra planes and pilots
on Monday morning, but the costs of that capacity are too high, so there is
no flexibility. Ride-hailing companies, however, have flexible supply. For
the typical twenty dollars per hour, a ride-hailing driver might prefer to take
the evening off. But for forty dollars per hour, during surge pricing, things
are different. Previously inactive drivers get into their cars and provide the
ride-hailing company and its passengers with the capacity exactly at the
time they are most needed.
   A remarkable aspect of surge pricing is that it not only reacts to real-time
changes (when it rains, more passengers need a ride), but it can also be very
targeted toward specific locations. This further helps activate and direct
capacity to where it is needed the most. Surge pricing puts the right
incentives in place in order for the drivers to do what is best for the overall
system. When demand is low, drivers switch to other tasks, including other
work and personal time off. As a result, not too many drivers are sitting idly
in their vehicles and waiting for passengers, which avoids wasting labor
costs. When demand picks up again, drivers provide the needed capacity
and start driving. This activates capacity when needed, which avoids long
waiting times for passengers.
   Besides restricting entry to the taxi industry, cab medallions have
traditionally served a secondary role. They provided customers with at least
a modicum of trust in the car and driver. Historically, it was the role of the
municipality to create trust by requiring cab operators to acquire a
medallion. How are the quality and the safety of the vehicle in the ride-
hailing industry ensured now that (almost) anyone can be a driver? Again,
creating new connections has a role in this. Because customers rate their
ride through the app, ride-hailing companies connect passengers to each
other, allowing them to share their experiences. This is a much cheaper
mechanism of certification than the city authority selling high-priced
medallions. Driver reputation and trustworthiness are crowdsourced.
Similarly, ride-hailing drivers also use the app to rate their passengers,
which can help protect other drivers from picking up potentially unpleasant
fares—a benefit not available to traditional cab drivers.
   Building a huge virtual fleet of privately owned vehicles, adjusting fleet
size to demand through surge pricing, and replacing the expensive
medallions with a mechanism for crowdsourcing reputation all require a
delivery model that is built on creating new connections. Such a connected
strategy simply cannot be imitated by the cab companies because no
company using medallions can start employing just anyone with a car who
wants to be a driver.
   Table 2-2 summarizes this approach of connecting previously
unconnected entities in an industry. Again, this part of connected strategy—
putting in new information pipes—is by no means limited to transportation:

            Airbnb connects travelers to empty rooms, houses, and the people
            who want to play host part time or full time. This idea really goes
            back to prior sites such as HomeAway (which includes VRBO,
            Vacation Rental by Owners) that leveraged empty vacation homes
            (owners of vacation homes are not in their vacation homes all year).
            Importantly, this capacity is inexpensive because it would otherwise
            be unused.
TABLE 2-2

Benefits of creating new connections
Connection                   Status quo                   Ride hailing

Passenger to vehicle         Flagging, dispatcher, taxi   App
                             stand
Payment                      Cash, credit card            Automated in-app purchase
Vehicle to vehicle           Dispatcher, two-way          GPS tracking, fleet management system
                             radio
Vehicle to vehicle outside   —                            Connects all vehicles on the platform
the fleet
Idle drivers and unused      —                            Connects to drivers who are presently not driving
vehicles
Passenger to passenger       —                            Crowdsource driver reputations
Driver to driver             —                            Passenger ratings leading to driver safety
Improvements                 —                            • Higher vehicle utilization
                                                          • No medallion needed
                                                          • No wasted time for driver to pick up and drop off car at the beginning
                                                            and end of shift
      ZocDoc allows physicians to post open appointment slots online,
      where they can be booked by patients. When an appointment is made,
      the patient is pleased to have found care, while the physician is happy
      to bring in an extra patient.
      In the same way OpenTable matches restaurant tables with eaters,
      Kayak matches travel capacity in the form of airline seats with those
      who want to book a flight, and StubHub helps fans find tickets for
      games and concerts while also increasing the occupancy of the
      stadiums.




            RELIEVING HUNGER THROUGH
            CREATING NEW CONNECTIONS
In the United States, seventy-two billion pounds of perfectly fine food from
restaurants, catering, and event companies end up in landfills every year. At
the same time, one in seven people goes to bed hungry. A lack of
connectivity has created this paradoxical state. Goodr, an Atlanta-based
food-waste management company, tries to alleviate this situation by
creating new connections. Through an app, clients notify Goodr that they
have surplus food. Goodr picks up, packages, and transports the food to
nonprofits that distribute it to those in need. Goodr keeps track of the
amount of food donated, making it easier for firms to take advantage of tax
benefits. All parts of the transaction are logged via a blockchain application,
creating a reliable record from donation to distribution of the food. Goodr
finances itself through fees based on pickup volume that are less than the
tax benefits that firms receive, creating a win-win situation for both firms
and once-hungry clients. In the first fifteen months of operation, Goodr has
been able to redirect nearly one million pounds of food—or about 850,000
meals.


   In sum, similar to innovators in the grocery space, ride-hailing
companies have effectively shifted out the efficiency frontier: the superior
customer experience comes with lower costs. This is what has made ride-
hailing companies such a game changer in the transportation industry in
many markets around the world.
Further Shifting the Frontier by
Creating New Connections
How can we reduce costs further still? As a passenger waits for a ride from
A to B, chances are that there are many cars driving almost the exact same
route. Most of them are likely to only have one person in the car. In the
United States, the average number of passengers in a vehicle is about 1.5.
Why add another car (and pay for the car and the driver)? Why not just help
some of these drivers who own their vehicles and are already driving with
the aim of getting from A to B make some quick cash? This is the idea of
BlaBlaCar.
    BlaBlaCar is a European carpooling company in the business of
connecting potential passengers with empty seats. Carpooling is an old idea
that has been used for decades by parents, commuters, and college students.
But, thanks to improved connections, carpooling has seen tremendous
growth. The driver of the car is driving the distance no matter what, so the
cost of adding a passenger is extremely low.
    Instead of paying for labor and ownership of the vehicle, all that needs to
be paid for is the gas. If the driver shares this expense with one or even
multiple passengers, costs come down even more. BlaBlaCar leaves pricing
at the discretion of the driver, but common price points are between ten and
twenty-five cents per mile, which is about a tenfold improvement over
traditional ride-hailing and even more compared to cabs. Technically
speaking, the fulfillment costs are limited to the extra fuel consumption that
results from adding a passenger and the added time for the extra pickup and
drop-off.
    Note that BlaBlaCar is doing much more than connecting potential
passengers with drivers. Instead of ride-hailing companies’ virtual fleets of
drivers acting as service providers, every vehicle on the street can now be
seen as a potential service provider. In this business, the lines between
passengers and drivers have become blurred. In chapter 7, we will discuss
such new business models based on connecting individual customers to
each other as peer-to-peer networks. The following examples show the
extensive reach of these connection architectures:
     What BlaBlaCar is to Uber, Couchsurfing is to Airbnb. Today, Mike
     sleeps in your apartment, and tomorrow, it might be the other way
     around.
     PatientsLikeMe connects patients to others who have similar
     conditions, facilitating information exchange regarding treatment
     options and outcomes and forming a powerful network. Initially
     focused on chronic conditions, such as ALS and lupus, the company
     has expanded to accept any patient with any condition, currently
     serving more than six hundred thousand members. Patients are able to
     learn and improve their outcomes based on previous experience for
     free, while researchers can gather data about what is working and
     develop better treatments.
     Online dating platforms such as eHarmony and Match.com are now
     the starting point for an estimated 5 percent of all new marriages in
     the United States, not to mention that well over one million babies
     have been born because their parents were matched by a computer
     algorithm. When it comes to loving relationships, both partners are,
     pardon the wording, customers and suppliers. Both request and
     respond. So, having two lonely hearts sitting at home and wishing for
     a partner is a waste.

   To be fair, unless you are super social and enjoy being with other people
rather than playing around with your phone, the willingness-to-pay for a
BlaBlaCar is likely to be lower than for a ride-sharing car. Beyond the
potentially chatty company in the car, finding a vehicle that gets you where
you want, when you want may also require some compromise in destination
or travel schedule.
Connected Strategy and Competitive
Advantage
In this chapter, we saw how the grocery and ride-hailing industries are
being transformed by firms using connected strategies. In both settings, we
saw how connected strategies can lead to more convenience: Having the
right groceries delivered to your doorstep or using the walls of a subway
station as a virtual supermarket is making grocery shopping more
convenient. Ordering a car via an app with automatic payment processing is
likewise increasing convenience.
    But connected strategies are not only about convenience and the
resulting higher willingness-to-pay. Unless we provide products and
services efficiently, we might not be shifting the efficiency frontier. Here is
where a deep dive into the operations that create and deliver the products or
services is required. In both grocery retailing and ride hailing, we saw that
costs are driven by many activities, some of which might not be adding
value to the customer experience. Having a large store might look nice, but
if what the customer wants is simply a visual display of groceries, any wall
coupled with augmented reality will do the job. And why pay a fortune for a
cab medallion if what customers really want is trust, which can be produced
through crowdsourcing at a much lower cost?
    The efficiency frontier will be our guiding compass throughout the
remaining chapters. If a firm is able to shift the frontier—that is, if a firm is
able to widen the gap it creates between the willingness-to-pay of its
customers and the fulfillment costs it incurs—it has taken an important step
toward creating a competitive advantage.
    But, unfortunately, shifting the efficiency frontier does not always
guarantee that you will achieve a competitive advantage that is sustainable
at least for a few years. Why not? While it is easy to see how Blue Apron
has shifted the frontier and might win out over having to shop at farmers’
markets, it is much more difficult to figure out why Blue Apron’s
willingness-to-pay/cost gap is larger than that of HelloFresh or meal kits
that Amazon or Walmart offers. As a matter of fact, Blue Apron has been
struggling to retain its customers because these competitors were able to
occupy a very similar location on the new, pushed-out efficiency frontier.
   Likewise, it is much harder to see how Uber’s willingness-to-pay/cost
gap is larger than that of other ride-hailing companies—a problem that Uber
was not able to overcome in China, where they lost against Didi. Just
creating connected experiences is often not enough to achieve a sustainable
competitive advantage. Once you’ve shown the world a new trick, other
firms will imitate you. In order to create a sustainable competitive
advantage, not only do you need to create connected experiences, you also
need to create connected relationships—the heart of a connected strategy.
   As we will see in chapter 5, it is especially through the repeat dimension
of connected strategies that you can build a sustainable competitive
advantage for your firm. Through repeated interactions, you are able to
continuously refine your ability to recognize the needs of your customers, to
translate those needs into a request for an optimal solution, and to have the
ability to respond to these requests. Powerful positive feedback effects
allow you to create long-lasting relationships with your customers and such
scale economies in your connected delivery model that competitors will
have a very hard time offering a better value proposition to customers.
   We would like to emphasize one more point: we are convinced that not
creating a connected strategy is a road to eventual extinction for most firms.
Technological and innovative forces all point toward increased connectivity.
At the same time, customer expectations are moving toward increased
personalization created by deeper connections. As mentioned before,
increased connectivity will become table stakes in many industries. As a
result, not providing customers with connected relationships will lead to
significant competitive disadvantages for your organization.
Connected Strategy and Privacy
Connected strategies are fundamentally based on a rich information flow
between the customer and the firm. It is this information that allows a firm
to personalize the customer relationship and to gain efficiencies in its
delivery model. At the same time, customers—be they firms or individuals
—are naturally wary about sharing this information. As a result, trust and
privacy concerns are central to creating long-lasting connected strategies.
   In the right hands, previously privately held information can be used to
create value-enhancing transactions—for example, by being able to design
products that better fulfill customer needs. But in the wrong hands, this
information can be very harmful to customers. We find it helpful to
distinguish among three types of costs that customers might incur:

        1. There typically exists some personal information in our lives that
           we would prefer not to share with others. This might include our
           financial situation, medical information, our sexual preferences,
           our political views, or our grades in college. Even though our life
           might not change a lot if our neighbor knew that we only got a
           C− in accounting, we would prefer to keep this information to
           ourselves. If this data can be used by firms, individuals, or
           governments to harass or persecute us, or to target us in order to
           influence our behavior with misleading information, the damage
           can be tremendous. Thus, there exists a potential cost of
           reducing personal (emotional) safety when data is used beyond
           the purposes for which it was originally sanctioned by the
           customer.
        2. Besides an emotional cost, sometimes data can be used against
           us to cause a monetary loss. We might have a genetic condition
           that would prevent us from getting life insurance; we might get
           higher quotes from our plumber if he knew the balance of our
           bank account; or we might receive offers for risky financial
           investments right after we left a bar where we consumed one too
           many drinks. In a business-to-business setting, we might worry
           that our data will leak to competitors, or that our supplier, after
           finding out that we have a severe shortage, will use this
           information against us by raising prices.
        3. Personal information might also be exploited by criminals. When
           we book a flight to Hawaii and this information becomes public,
           we basically put up an Open for Business sign for the local
           burglar community. Likewise, if our Social Security number falls
           into the wrong hands, we open ourselves up to the risk of
           identity theft.

   Social stigma, various forms of discrimination, and outright criminal
activity are all good reasons for protecting the privacy of those who have
entrusted us with their data. This is true for all types of data, but it is
especially important for data obtained as part of a connected strategy. One
reason for this is that data created in a connected relationship tends to be
richer, more current, and more confidential than data obtained in episodic
relationships (if any data is collected at all in those interactions). Another
reason is even scarier. Because of the automated nature of some elements of
the connected relationship, customers are not only at risk of having
strangers access their data, but hackers could also control the temperature of
their houses, open and close the doors, control their connected cars, or steal
money out of their bank accounts.
   To create a connected strategy, trust between the firm and the customer
becomes an essential element. A loss of trust will damage or end long-term
relationships with customers very quickly. Data collection can either
engender trust or destroy it. A core question you need to ask is, How do our
data collection and usage affect our customers’ trust in our company? Best
to ask it early—and often.
   When firms don’t get the trust equation right, connected strategies can
backfire. Remember the well-publicized story of Target inferring the
pregnancy of a young woman from her buying habits and sending her
coupons for maternity clothing, making her dad confused and angry
because he didn’t know about the pregnancy, or the questionable and
unauthorized use of Facebook data by Cambridge Analytica to affect voting
in the 2016 US presidential election, or various Google apps tracking
location information despite a user’s having turned off location history.
Such missteps can be very costly and cause your customers to lose their
trust in your ability to keep their data confidential and to use it responsibly.
   Moreover, firms developing novel connected strategies can find
themselves in regulatory gray zones. Should drivers for ride-hailing
companies be considered employees or independent contractors? Should
staying in an apartment rented via Airbnb be considered an illegal short-
term rental? Should recordings gathered automatically by Amazon’s Echo
devices be able to be requested as evidence in court cases? These are all
legal issues that are currently being worked out. As you develop a
connected strategy for your firm, you must stay abreast of the regulatory
changes that affect you.
The Disruptive Potential of
Connected Strategies
We covered a lot of ground in this chapter. In the next chapter, we will
guide you through a workshop that will allow you to start applying the first
concepts of connected strategy to your own organization.
   To summarize, we first introduced the concepts of willingness-to-pay
and the efficiency frontier of an industry. The attributes of your product or
service and the way you interact with your customer affect your customer’s
happiness, which translates into willingness-to-pay. At the same time, you
incur fulfillment costs in trying to create this customer experience. In other
words, there is a trade-off between willingness-to-pay and fulfillment costs.
Different firms will strike a different balance between willingness-to-pay
and cost; they will position themselves differently in the marketplace. By
plotting firms and their various positions, we can identify the efficiency
frontier in an industry. The efficiency frontier is defined by those firms who
are furthest out in the willingness-to-pay/cost space. These firms are able to
achieve the maximum willingness-to-pay given their level of fulfillment
costs (or, conversely, they are able to minimize cost given their level of
willingness-to-pay).
   Connected strategies are so disruptive because they allow innovative
firms to push out the efficiency frontier. From the perspective of other
firms, it looks as if the firm with a connected strategy has completely
broken the traditional trade-off between willingness-to-pay and cost. Firms
with connected strategies are able to break the existing trade-off by
fundamentally changing how they connect with their customers and whom
they connect. Blue Apron reshaped how a customer thinks about grocery
shopping for cooking: rather than finding a recipe, making a shopping list,
and driving to various stores, a customer receives recipes and the exact
ingredients at home. At the same time, Blue Apron created new connections
between local farmers and end customers through its meal boxes. Likewise,
ride-hailing companies redefined how customers interact with ride service
providers. Rather than hailing a cab or calling a dispatcher, customers order
a ride via an app and pay for it seamlessly. And ride-hailing companies
created many new connections between previously unconnected parties:
individual drivers with cars and riders with mobility needs.
   While pushing out the efficiency frontier is a key step toward achieving
competitive advantage, it is not sufficient. The main question is whether
other firms can easily replicate your strategy and follow your move to the
new position outside the old efficiency frontier. We will have more to say
about this topic at the end of chapter 5, when we talk about the repeat
dimension of connected strategies. As we will see, the repeat dimension
holds a key source of sustainable competitive advantage.
   Lastly, we touched on the crucial issue of data privacy, a topic we will
repeatedly return to throughout this book. Connected strategies
fundamentally rely on a trust relationship between customer and firm.
Customers send, actively or automatically, data to firms with the
expectation that firms utilize this data to create a superior customer
experience. Failing to uphold this trust puts both the strategy and the firm at
risk.
                                     3

                         Workshop 1
                Using Connectivity to
                  Provide Superior
               Customer Experiences at
                    Lower Costs


As promised, at the end of each part of this book, we have a workshop
chapter. In this workshop, you will start exploring initial ideas for your
connected strategy. In the workshop in chapter 6, you will consider what it
takes to create a connected customer relationship. In the workshop in
chapter 10, we will guide you through the process of creating a connected
delivery model. At the end of chapter 10, we will also provide a summary
of how the three worksheets form the basis for creating your overall
connected strategy.
   Please visit our website at connected-strategy.com for additional
material, including larger templates for the exercises in all the workshops.
These are easier to fill out than the pages in this book. We have also posted
examples of filled-out templates that can be very useful as models when
you start working through the exercises for your own organization.
   At this point, we have not yet presented to you many of the tools to
create a connected strategy. As a result, this workshop is shorter than the
ones in chapters 6 and 10. Nonetheless, we want you to start thinking of
what connected strategies might look like for your organization. We will
help you do this by having you work through the following steps:
1. Ask a set of diagnostic questions concerning your current
   connections with customers.
2. Brainstorm the effects that a connected strategy could have for
   your organization.
3. Start identifying drivers of willingness-to-pay.
4. Sketch the efficiency frontier for your industry that reflects the
   trade-off between willingness-to-pay and fulfillment costs.
Step 1: Diagnostic Questions
We have found the following questions to be a good starting point for
thinking about a connected strategy. These questions might appear simple,
almost naïve, at first. As we found out in our discussions with many
companies, however, they are surprisingly valuable.

          How often do you currently connect to your customers?
          What kind of information do you receive about your customers’
          needs?
          How does information flow from the customer to you? For
          instance, does the information flow rely on the customer taking
          the initiative, or does the information flow happen in a more
          continuous and autonomous manner?
          How long does it take for a customer need to reach you? (How
          much time elapses between a customer’s realization that he or
          she wants or needs your product or service and the receipt of this
          information by your organization?)
          How long does it take for you to react once you have received a
          customer need?
          What do you learn each time a customer connects to your firm?
          How are you integrating these episodic interactions into a single,
          connected experience for your customers?
Step 2: Brainstorm the Potential of a
Connected Strategy
Now let’s get a bit more playful and start imagining what a connected
strategy could do for your organization. The cases discussed in chapter 2
and the podcasts featured on connected-strategy.com might provide you and
your team with some sparks to ignite creative discussions of the potential of
connected strategies for you. The following prompts will also help you
move from knowledge to action.

Imagine a world in which customers could instantaneously communicate
their needs to you. You are by their side as they go through life, anytime
and anywhere. How would this increase in connectivity allow you to
improve how you serve your customers? More specifically,

           How could you use this information to increase the willingness-
           to-pay of your customers?
           How could you use this information to decrease your fulfillment
           costs?

Next, imagine a world in which you know a customer need even before the
customer knows this need herself. Not only are you walking alongside her,
but—given permission by your customer—you have visibility into her bank
accounts and even some of the inner functions of her body. For example,
your customer might need to save for retirement but has not given this
matter any thought and presently is in debt. Or your patient might have a
mild narrowing of the coronary arteries but is not currently showing any
symptoms.

           How could you use this information to increase the willingness-
           to-pay of your customers?
           How could you use this information to decrease your fulfillment
           costs?
Step 3: Start Identifying Drivers of
Willingness-to-Pay
The willingness-to-pay for a product or service is a result of three factors:
how much a customer likes your product or service once he has it; how easy
it is for him to obtain it; and how expensive it is to own the product. We
will refer to the first part as consumption utility, the second part as
accessibility, and the third part as the cost of ownership.
    Consider consumption utility first. Consumption utility comes from
various attributes of a product or service. For example, legroom (for air
travel), the distance between two charges (for electric cars), weight (for
bicycles), pixel count (for cameras), size (for clothing), and entertainment
(for movies). The many possible attributes can be categorized into two
groups:

      Performance attributes: Performance attributes are features of the
      product or service that most people agree are better. For example, we
      all prefer more legroom, longer distances before recharging, lighter
      bicycles, higher pixel resolution, and so on.
      Fit attributes: With some attributes, customers do not all agree on
      what is best. Some viewers like to watch House of Cards, while
      others might not. Some people enjoy a great steak, but vegetarians do
      not. When it comes to clothing, we have different body shapes and
      need differently sized clothes. Hence the term fit for these attributes.

    Next, consider the accessibility of the product or service. Customers
often face an inconvenience in obtaining the product or receiving the
service. Economists often refer to this component as transaction costs or
friction. Everything else being equal, we prefer our food here (as opposed to
three miles away) and now (as opposed to after a thirty-minute wait). The
following are the two major components of accessibility:

      Location: How far does your customer have to travel to get your
      product or service?
      Timing: How long does your customer have to wait for your product
      or service?

   The third and final component of willingness-to-pay is the cost of
ownership. As customers, we derive more value from a product that lasts
longer and thus is cheaper on a per-usage basis. No matter whether it’s
electronics, sports gear, furniture, or kitchen equipment, products wear out,
become obsolete, or need to be replaced for other reasons. Other elements
of the cost of ownership include the need for maintenance and repair,
benefits from potential warranties, and everything else that customers need
to pay for when using the product.
   Worksheet 3-1 summarizes these dimensions of willingness-to-pay and
will help you keep track of the relevant drivers in your business
environment. The drivers of willingness-to-pay are the most important
variables from the perspective of your customer. Some of them are obvious.
We all want greater products or services right here, right now, and, ideally,
free of charge.
   Don’t stop there. At this point, consider the work that you did as part of
step 2 when you brainstormed about immediate information availability and
ways to know a customer’s needs before even the customer becomes aware
of the need. By having a connected relationship with your customer,
including instantaneous communication, you can hopefully identify more
subtle needs (and thus alternative drivers of willingness-to-pay) than “right
here and right now.” For example, you might realize that your customer is
afraid of planning for retirement because this would require difficult
discussions with his spouse, or that your patient really felt sick multiple
times before showing up to the emergency room but did not bring this up
with the primary care physician during a regular visit because there wasn’t
enough time. Those are the nuggets that will be the starting point for
designing a connected customer relationship, which we will help you do in
the second workshop.
WORKSHEET 3-1

Identify willingness-to-pay drivers of your customers
Step 4: Sketch the Efficiency
Frontier for Your Industry
Companies cannot be good at everything. They face trade-offs in their
business. For example, they trade off performance attributes and the costs of
providing products or services. More legroom means higher willingness-to-
pay but fewer passengers per plane and higher costs per passenger.
Similarly, there is a trade-off between the cost of providing goods and
services and how inconvenient it is for a customer to access them. As
passengers, we would love to have a car waiting for us at every corner of
town—it would translate into convenient access. But it also would mean
lower vehicle utilization and higher costs.
   Such trade-offs can be illustrated graphically using the efficiency frontier
framework discussed in the previous chapter. Worksheet 3-2 helps you draw
the efficiency frontier in your industry through the following steps:

         1. Pick your most relevant competitors.
         2. Rank them in order of the willingness-to-pay that their products
            or services create. In other words, put yourself in the shoes of a
            typical customer and ask yourself which product or service is
            the most desirable, ignoring the price you would have to pay for
            it. For example, if someone else paid for it (though you would
            still have to do the purchasing, transaction processing, and
            waiting), would you rather receive a Mercedes C-class, a BMW
            328, a Tesla Model 3, or a Lexus IS? You can refer back to step
            3 of this workshop and ask yourself how well your competitors
            perform along the dimensions of performance and fit attributes,
            location, timeliness, and cost of ownership. An accurate,
            absolute measurement is not required—relative comparisons are
            sufficient. If you believe that the willingness-to-pay is very
            different for different market segments, draw a separate
            efficiency frontier for each market segment.
         3. Rank your competitors and yourself in terms of fulfillment
            costs. Ask yourself, What is the average cost per transaction that
            you have versus your competitors? Note that this is the average
            cost. For instance, one firm might spend a lot on advertising, but
            if it has many customers, it can spread this cost over many
            transactions, affecting its average cost per transaction only by a
            little. Again, a simple rank ordering is sufficient at this time.
          4. With this information, you can position yourself and your
             competitors in worksheet 3-2. Next, draw the line that
             represents the efficiency frontier. This is the group of firms that
             are farthest up and to the right on the plot—that is, the firms that
             have the highest willingness-to-pay for any given level of
             fulfillment costs (or, conversely, that have the lowest cost for
             any given level of willingness-to-pay).

WORKSHEET 3-2

The efficiency frontier for your industry




       THE COMPETITION BETWEEN POWER
             TOOLS AND NECKTIES
It’s easy to ask, “What are your most relevant competitors?” But that
seemingly simple question is much more complicated than one might
initially suspect. Consider the following example, inspired by a remark on
substitutes by Michael E. Porter, one of the most influential scholars of
modern strategy. Imagine you work for a power-tool company. As a power-
tool company, who are you competing against? One way of answering this
question is by looking at who else is producing power tools. Framed this
way, competitors such as DeWalt, Bosch, Ryobi, Hilti, and similar tool
makers might make it onto your list.
   Another way of tackling this question is to reframe it and ask, “For what
purpose do customers use power tools such as a circular saw?” Chances are
your customers might want to use the saw to cut some wood, maybe in
order to build a new dining table. When asked this way, the question reveals
that you, as the maker of circular saws, are not just competing with other
power-tool makers, you also are in competition with the makers of dining
tables. The more customers are willing to tackle the job of building dining
tables themselves, the more money they will pay to power-tool companies
versus furniture stores. (Companies making connected power tools have
taken advantage of this by using connectivity to make it easier to use their
tools. Check out our website for a podcast featuring an interesting
discussion on connected power tools with industry leaders Hilti and Bosch.)
   But we can reframe the question again and ask, “Why do people buy
power tools in the first place?” When you ask the question this way, you
will quickly realize that one of the most common reasons for power-tool
purchases is that customers are shopping for Father’s Day or Christmas
presents. You probably sense where we are going with this argument. In this
framing of the question, you realize that power-tool makers are competing
with other providers of Father’s Day or Christmas gifts, neckties being one
of the most important ones.
   So, when we ask you to think of your competitors, how broadly should
you look? We propose that you start with those companies that you are
directly competing against—in our example, this would be the other makers
of power tools. But, especially when it comes to imagining innovation and
disruption, we want you to think about the competition more broadly by
considering the ultimate needs that your customers want to fulfill, a topic
we will return to in chapter 5. Disruption typically happens from players
outside your current market. Just remember: hotels were disrupted not by
other hotels but by Airbnb …
   Once you have filled out worksheet 3-2, you can think about the
following questions:

         Where are you relative to the efficiency frontier? Are you on the
         efficiency frontier, or are there firms providing a similar (or even
         higher) willingness-to-pay while enjoying lower fulfillment
         costs? Recall our comparisons between meal-kit deliveries and
         farmers’ markets and between ride hailing and cabs. Not every
         firm in an industry is likely to be on the frontier.
         If you are not on the efficiency frontier, what efficiency
         improvements do you plan to pursue in order to reduce your
         fulfillment costs?
         Assuming you are on the efficiency frontier, do you feel that you
         are in the right spot on the frontier? Or do you feel that you
         should rethink the trade-off between willingness-to-pay and
         costs (e.g., sacrifice some efficiency to provide a better product
         or service)?
         What are the trends in your industry? Is there a pressure to lower
         costs (moving to the right), or do you see your firm win over its
         rivals by providing products and services with a higher
         willingness-to-pay (moving up)?
         Are there new technologies that have allowed some of the firms
         already in the industry or potentially new entrants to push out the
         frontier? Do you see new business models breaking the trade-off
         between willingness-to-pay and fulfillment costs?
      PART TWO




CREATING CONNECTED
     CUSTOMER
   RELATIONSHIPS
                                      4

            Recognize, Request, and
                   Respond
                   Building Connected
                  Customer Experiences


Here is a typical customer experience that you’ve probably come across:
David sits in his home office, about to print a set of urgent letters, when his
printer runs out of toner! He grumbles, gets into his car, and drives to the
nearest office supply store. He wanders the huge store until he finds the
toner aisle. Hopefully, he remembers the exact printer model he has. Is it the
HP Office JetPro 6978 or the HP Office JetPro 8710? Each uses a different
cartridge, even though they look pretty similar. He decides it is the 6978
(turns out it’s his lucky day and he is right). He grabs a multipack because
the store is out of single cartridges, and he prays that his aging printer will
last long enough to use all this toner. To pay, he waits in the long checkout
line. When it’s finally his turn, he has trouble finding his credit card. He
eventually pays, gets back into his car, and makes it home nearly two hours
later to resume printing.
    Now, let’s switch perspectives. Assume you are in charge of the toner
division at a printer company. What are you spending your resources on?
Most likely, a good proportion goes to developing longer-lasting toner,
crisper colors, better cartridges, and efficiency improvements from
manufacturing to distribution. While there is nothing wrong with a firm’s
striving to build better products or to drive down costs, our printer example
shows how far removed those actions often are from the real pain points of
the customer. Customer and firm are really poorly connected.
   In this and the next chapter, we dive into the concept of a connected
customer relationship. These two chapters are followed by a workshop
chapter, which will help you build your own set of connected relationships.
As we defined in chapter 1, a connected customer relationship is a
relationship between a customer and a firm in which episodic interactions
are replaced by frequent, low-friction, and customized interactions enabled
by rich data exchange. What would this look like in practical terms? It
surely must be different from David’s experience with the toner.
   Let us first look at one experience at a time. We want to understand the
process that a customer goes through of recognizing a need, requesting a
solution to this need, and experiencing how the firm responds to the
request. The next chapter adds the fourth R of connected relationships,
repeat, and will explain how such individual customer experiences are
woven together over time to create a lasting customer relationship.
   Like any customer experience, the interaction in our toner example starts
with a customer need. The printer uses up toner one page at a time. As long
as the printouts are of high quality, the customer might not be aware of the
need for more toner, even though the printer cartridge might be almost
empty. But as the ink on the paper becomes weaker and weaker, the
customer gains awareness of the need. In marketing language, needs of
which customers themselves are not yet aware are called latent needs.
   Once customers are aware of their needs, they search for options. This
step can be remarkably complex, especially these days, with our ability to
order almost anything from anywhere around the globe. Quite often
customers will not be aware of all the options that could possibly satisfy
their needs. Once options have been surfaced, a customer will have to
choose from among retail channels, brand names, product quantities, and
much more. Given the complexity of options, deciding which is best isn’t
easy. Finding the product, paying for it, and taking it home is a time-
consuming hassle.
   But the interaction episode is still not complete. Our customer still has to
replace the old toner cartridge with the new one. Lots of things can still go
wrong at this stage—the new cartridge might leak or the plastic hinge in the
printer might break, and rather than printing his letters, David is now on the
phone talking to technical support.
   As the printer example illustrates, even one single interaction episode
between customer and firm can be a long journey. While we described this
journey for an individual end customer, it is important to note that
customers in business-to-business settings experience a very similar
journey. We find it helpful to break up this customer journey into three
distinct phases, each dealing with a fundamental question:

             1. Why does the customer engage in the interaction in the first
                place?
             2. How does the customer go about identifying, ordering, and
                paying for the desired product?
             3. What products and services are provided to the customer?

   Each of these three phases has a number of steps to it, as is illustrated in
figure 4-1.
   Moreover, each of these three phases corresponds to a key design
dimension of connected relationships. As a manager building connected
relationships, you need to ask yourself how you will recognize your
customers’ needs (or help them recognize their needs); you need to
configure activities that will help the customer identify and request the
option that would best satisfy this need; and you need to put in place a
system that allows you to respond with this desired option in a cost-
effective way.

FIGURE 4-1

The three phases of the customer journey




   We will use the printer example to illustrate the differences among the
four connected customer experiences that we presented in chapter 1:

       Respond-to-desire
      Curated offering
      Coach behavior
      Automatic execution

   As we shall see, these four experiences start affecting the customer
earlier and earlier in the customer journey. Let’s go back to David’s
experience buying a printer cartridge. To state the obvious, David’s
experience was not particularly positive and reflected the total absence of
any connection between him and the printer company. Though not a formal
term, we might label such an experience a buy-what-we-have customer
experience. The firm waits for the customer to show up, and the customer
has to buy what’s available. Practically the entire customer journey was
David’s responsibility. David had to realize the need for a new toner
cartridge. David had to figure out which precise toner he needed. David had
to drive to a store, search for the product, stand in line, pay for the product,
drive home, and replace the cartridge. How can we improve this customer’s
experience?
The Respond-to-Desire Connected
Customer Experience
How do you think David would feel about the following customer
experience? Upon realizing that he needs a new cartridge, David goes
online to his favorite retailer, types in his printer model, clicks to order the
correct toner, and pays with the same click because his credit card number
and shipping address are already stored. Two hours later, his doorbell rings
and the toner is delivered. Though David is still in the driver’s seat for
executing the transaction and performing almost every step of the customer
journey, this transaction is associated with far less friction, so it is much
more pleasant for David.
    This is the idea behind a respond-to-desire connected customer
experience: firms try to provide the customer with the desired product or
service in the fastest, most convenient way possible. In terms of the
customer journey, firms using respond-to-desire significantly reduce the
friction from the moment a customer has decided on the desired option to
the moment the customer receives the product. Moreover, these firms are
able to provide the customer with exactly the desired option (only a single
black toner cartridge, not the multipack). To understand the anatomy of a
respond-to-desire connected customer experience, consider figure 4-2.
    The figure divides the steps along the customer’s journey from latent
need to the postpurchase experience that we introduced in figure 4-1 into
two spheres. The upper half of the figure shows steps that are carried out by
the customer, while the lower half captures steps that are carried out by the
firm. Our toner example started with the customer realizing the printer had
run out of toner. Note that the following steps have to happen regardless of
whether the customer buys replacement toner online or goes to the local
office supply store: the customer had to look at some available options (and
avoid the confusion between different model numbers), the customer had to
choose, and the customer had to place an order, be it at the physical or the
virtual checkout.
    From the perspective of the customer, what makes for a good respond-to-
desire experience? One element is clearly the amount of effort expended;
the less, the better! One-click checkout with a credit card on record is more
convenient than going to the store. Customers like companies that listen
carefully to what they want and respond to their desires quickly. Hence the
name respond-to-desire.
   For some respond-to-desire customer experiences, such as running out of
toner, speed is the most important attribute the firm must master. For
instance, being able to send a car within minutes is a critical attribute for
customers of Uber or Lyft. For Airbnb, in contrast, the critical attribute
affecting a customer’s happiness is the variety of options in style and price
where the customer wants to visit. The speed of booking is important but
not the key advantage propelling the use of the service.

FIGURE 4-2

The respond-to-desire connected customer experience




   Amazon has been a pioneer in combining the order and payment process
into “one click.” To further facilitate ordering, Amazon introduced Dash
buttons, small Wi-Fi devices that can attach to the fridge, the washing
machine, or the bathroom vanity. With the press of a button, items from
bottled water to baby wipes can be reordered.
The Curated Offering Connected
Customer Experience
How could the online toner-shopping experience be improved? Imagine
that, after David logs in to his online account, the site suggests the correct
toner cartridge based on his prior purchases, which eliminates the need for
him to figure out the right type of toner for his printer. In addition, the site
could also suggest reordering paper, even though David did not ask for any
paper (but is about to run out—good catch!). This is what we call a curated
offering connected customer experience. Amazon, for example, shows a
“frequently bought together” selection and is able to make personalized
recommendations, taking into account what the customer has purchased in
the past and what bundles of items are often purchased together in the same
transaction.
   Respond-to-desire requires the customer to articulate a specific need.
Sometimes, however, customers might not know exactly what they want, or
it would take them considerable effort to figure out. In the curated offering
connected experience, the firm becomes active in the customer journey
earlier than in the respond-to-desire experience. While respond-to-desire
requires customers to know exactly what they want, curated offering helps
customers at earlier stages in the journey, searching for options and
deciding on options. Take another example: a customer knows she wants to
watch a comedy but might not know what new comedies have been
released. In this case, a curated offering is very helpful. Netflix suggests
comedies based on previous choices and choices of similar customers. In
general, curated offering makes search outcomes much more personalized.
   A curated offering thus customizes the firm’s response with a specific set
of options. In doing so, this format can also anticipate needs. Figure 4-3
shows the sequence of events for the curated offering experience. Again, the
activities performed by the customer are on top, with the firm’s activities on
the bottom. As we can see by comparing figures 4-2 and 4-3, in the curated
offering model, the firm takes a more active role in the search and selection
process. Rather than expecting to receive a specific order, the firm surfaces
options the customer wasn’t aware of and makes recommendations
concerning which options might best fulfill the customer’s needs.
    Blue Apron, or one of the similar meal-kit providers we discussed in
chapter 2, is a powerful example of curated offering. Think about how Blue
Apron’s curated offering differs from a respond-to-desire experience. A
respond-to-desire experience would have saved you from needing to run an
errand by enabling you to order online and have products delivered to your
house. In fact, home delivery services for groceries have witnessed dramatic
growth. All of them share the principle of “you order, we deliver.” Though
this is better than spending your time in a supermarket checkout line, the
burden of finding recipes, choosing one, and creating the shopping list still
lies with you as the customer. And you are still stuck with the extra
ingredients that did not fit the recipe’s portion sizes. In contrast, for many
customers, relying on Blue Apron to organize the meals and portion sizes is
more convenient, more fun, and also healthier, creating a higher-quality
service compared with a respond-to-desire experience, not to mention a
buy-what-we-have approach. (For another example of curated offering, see
the sidebar.)

FIGURE 4-3

The curated offering connected customer experience




                 TRUE PERSONALIZATION
Curated offering experiences have been helped tremendously by advances
in production and sensing technologies that allow customization down to
the individual. The cosmetics industry was one of the early adopters of this
development. The market for foundation, which is around $1 billion in the
United States alone, is a good example. With all the variations in skin tone
and texture, the quest for the right shade and formulation of this cosmetic
has been a major pain point for customers for a long time. With Shiseido’s
bareMinerals Made-2-Fit foundation, a customer can use her smartphone to
download an app, scan her face, and receive a personalized foundation that
matches her skin color.
   Advances in 3-D printing technology also promise unprecedented
customization with respect to pharmaceuticals. With pills, for example,
inventory constraints limit the number of dosages that are currently
available. With 3-D printers, tablets or gummies can be created directly at
the pharmacy with the desired personalized dosage. The created pills can
even contain more than one needed medication (so-called poly pills), or
gummies can be made in more interesting-looking shapes (dinosaurs,
trucks, etc.) for children.
The Coach Behavior Connected
Customer Experience
Returning to our printer example, neither respond-to-desire nor curated
offering solved a basic problem: the customer realized the need to buy new
toner only after the toner ran out. The firm waited for the customer to take
the initiative, to start the interaction. Unfortunately, in many cases,
customers are late in taking the initiative, causing inconvenience.
    How can we help customers remember earlier? Perhaps the retailer could
have already sent the customer a reminder to reorder last week. Such a
reminder might have been based on past purchasing behavior—the
customer bought toner roughly every eight weeks, and now it has been
seven weeks since the last order. While reminding the customer to reorder
toner, perhaps the retailer could also remind the customer to run the
cleaning function on the printer to keep print quality high—another action
customers know they should be doing but don’t. Either way, the firm
serving the customer is more proactive than in the previous two connected
customer experiences.
    We call this type of connected experience coach behavior. There are
many instances in which people would like to engage in certain actions, but
inertia and decision biases get in the way. We would like to lose weight, but
we have a hard time sticking to a healthier diet. We want to become more
fit, but we can’t stick to our workout regimen. We need to take our
medications, but we are forgetful. With coach behavior, the firm takes on a
parental role and coaches the customer to change behavior. In the customer
journey, it acts one stage before curated offering kicks in. It activates
customers’ awareness of their own impending needs.
    In figure 4-4, we have illustrated the coach behavior connected customer
experience. Since most of the time it is a behavioral change that is desired
(rather than the purchase of a discrete good or service), we have changed
the labels in some of the steps. Rather than recommending a set of options,
the firm recommends that the customer take a particular action (or reminds
the customer to do so). The customer then decides which action to take, and
ideally behavioral change ensues.
    Notice how the customer experience in figure 4-4 puts more emphasis on
the firm taking action. While the customer ultimately takes action (takes the
pill, avoids the burger, goes to the gym), the firm watches over the
customer, knowing what the customer needs now and in the long run—not
just what the customer wants right now. As with the curated offering, such
knowledge might come from observing many customers, or from what the
customer has previously told the firm. Imagine a coach behavior experience
in which a customer, to maintain a diet, tells his bank to block his credit
card whenever he is within one hundred feet of a fast-food restaurant. In a
respond-to-desire customer experience, the customer would get that
cheeseburger whenever he desires, in the most convenient way. But the
customer also knows that he would regret it twenty minutes later. So, a
good coach behavior experience is indeed somewhat parental.

FIGURE 4-4

The coach behavior connected customer experience




   We know that creating behavioral change can be difficult; otherwise, all
of us would easily stick to our New Year’s resolutions. Peer pressure is a
potent tool in this regard. As a result, a number of firms offering coach
behavior experiences also facilitate the creation of peer-to-peer networks in
which participants can celebrate their efforts (“I did 12,000 steps today!”)
and encourage each other. By borrowing tools developed by game designers
to make online games engaging, if not addictive, many firms are using
“gamification” to create behavioral change. Participants collect points and
badges, and engage in friendly competition against themselves and peers to
accomplish their behavioral goals. We will come back to these networks in
chapter 7. (For more examples of coach behavior, see the sidebar.)
            COACH BEHAVIOR WEARABLE
                    SENSORS
Wearable sensors are enabling a whole range of coach behavior customer
experiences. Consider the following three examples. L’Oréal has developed
a battery-free wearable sensor to measure individual UV exposure. The
sensor is less than two millimeters thick and nine millimeters in diameter,
and it is designed to be worn on the thumbnail. It can store up to three
months of data and is paired to a smartphone app to collect and display
daily UVA and UVB exposure, offer personalized sun safety coaching tips,
and track trends in UV behavior over time.
   For individuals who want to learn or improve their yoga poses but don’t
always have access to an instructor, Sydney-based Wearable X has created a
solution. Its Nadi X pants have woven-in sensors around the hips, knees,
and ankles that measure body positions and provide haptic feedback,
guiding the athlete to the correct positions through gentle vibrations. When
paired via Bluetooth to an app on the customer’s phone, further visual and
audio cues break down different yoga poses that supplement the vibrations.
   To help runners avoid injuries by coaching them to achieve a better
running style, Sensoria developed an anklet device attached to a special
running sock that users wear while running. Sensors in the bottom of the
sock measure where the user’s foot makes contact with the ground and for
how long. The anklet contains a CPU that analyzes a rich variety of data
from the sensors and relays that data to an accompanying smartphone app.
The app displays a detailed heat map of where pressure is being placed on
the foot, along with detailed statistics regarding foot contact time, cadence,
steps taken, stride length, and speed. This information is shown in the
Sensoria app so users can adjust their movements in real time. The app also
gives audio alerts in real time with an automated voice that provides
feedback about any incorrect foot-strike patterns or other adjustments to
prevent injury.
The Automatic Execution Connected
Customer Experience
Let’s revisit the printer story one more time. This time, imagine that the
printing is going well when the doorbell rings. David is surprised to see a
box delivered. He doesn’t recall having ordered anything. Inside the box is
a toner cartridge. How odd, he thinks. He resumes printing, and his
computer alerts him that his printer is about to run out of toner. Only then
does he remember that when he bought the printer, he gave the printer
company permission to automatically send more toner as it ran low. David
just experienced an automatic execution connected customer experience.
Once the firm is authorized to take care of something, the firm
automatically gathers information and fulfills the need, often before the
customer had realized that the need has arisen. This is shown in figure 4-5.
This diagram is almost the opposite of the respond-to-desire flow in figure
4-2. Here, almost all activities are controlled by the firm because the firm
knows what the customer needs and when. This is somewhere between Big
Brother and loving mother.
   Delivering such a connected customer experience can be difficult. Unlike
in the case of curated offering, the lack of customer involvement in the
decision-making steps of the customer journey makes errors more possible.
True, customers who go online and search for a book on baby names are
likely to be future parents. But should a retailer send them a crib and
diapers based on this information alone? Making automatic execution
connected customer experiences work requires increasing the bandwidth of
the information flow that moves from customers to firms.
   With the increasing connectivity of objects through the Internet of
Things, more and more of these automatic relationships based on
continuous information flows will become possible. The printer example is
real. HP has a program called Instant Ink that works exactly as we
described. In this case, HP ships replacement toner to customers once their
printers send out a “low ink” signal to the company. Brother has a similar
program called Brother Refresh, where customers can decide whether they
want the company to send the ink or leave the fulfillment to Amazon.
FIGURE 4-5

The automatic execution connected customer experience




   Soon our refrigerators, sensing that the weight of the milk container is
very low, will be able to reorder our milk for delivery by tomorrow
morning. (Of course, the fridge also checked our calendar to make sure we
were not going on vacation starting tomorrow and wouldn’t need the milk.)
   Other already-existing examples of automatic execution connected
customer experiences are in the realm of medical intervention. Fall-
detection sensors are small medical devices for seniors who are at increased
risk of falling. Early generations of this technology followed the principle
of respond-to-desire. A senior in need of help could press a button on a
wearable device, activating an emergency call anywhere in the apartment or
house. This was clearly addressing an important unmet need, as previously,
a senior who fell down the basement stairs might have needed urgent
medical attention but was unable to move and reach the phone. That is why
the latest fall-detection devices have switched to an automatic execution
relationship. Sensors in the device detect the fall and are able to take action
automatically, even without the involvement of the patient. (For another
example of merging curated offering with automatic execution, see the
sidebar.)
The Information Flow from
Customers to the Firm
A central aspect in creating new connected customer experiences is to
design the information flow between the customer and your firm. After all,
it is this information that allows you to recognize your customer’s needs
and to identify the optimal solution. We find it helpful to think about five
dimensions to describe this information flow:

        1. The trigger of the information flow, which could be the customer
           or the firm
        2. The frequency of the information flow (episodic vs. continuous)
        3. The richness or bandwidth of the information flow (low vs. high)
        4. The customer effort associated with this information flow (low
           vs. high)
        5. The information processing that is required to infer the right
           product or service solution in response to the customer need (the
           customer might explicitly express which product or service she
           wants, or the appropriate product might be inferred by the firm)




      AUTOMATIC EXECUTION WITH VIDEO
                  GAMES
Consider the following stunning statistic: if the players of the hugely
popular online game World of Warcraft spent their time creating Wikipedias
rather than playing the game, they could create a new Wikipedia every
week! That’s a remarkable testament to how engaging and “sticky” games
have become. Video game companies have come a long way when it comes
to curated offering and automatic execution. It used to be that every player
would purchase the same version of a game by going into a store and
buying a game cartridge or CD. Now, with online gaming, game producers
learn about the preferences and skills of individual gamers and create
customized experiences that keep a player in a state of flow. Players are
exposed to challenges that are neither too difficult (causing frustration) nor
too easy (causing boredom), a process called dynamic difficulty adjustment
that requires sophisticated artificial intelligence on the back end. Likewise,
different players derive pleasure from different aspects of a game. There are
achievers (interested in gaining levels and points), explorers (interested in
understanding the nuances of the game), socializers (interested in
interacting with other players), and killers (the name says it all). By
understanding a particular player’s type, the video game can adjust and get
the player into more enjoyable situations. No wonder one study of World of
Warcraft found that 75 percent of gamers play longer than two hours per
day on average, and 25 percent play longer than five hours per day.


   You need to make decisions along these five dimensions before you can
turn to the technical aspects of building a connected strategy, such as
smarter devices or increased communication bandwidth. This is
summarized by table 4-1.
    At the beginning of the chapter, we introduced the buy-what-we-have
customer experience, illustrated by the customer’s painful journey from the
late realization of toner shortage, to a painful ordering process, and finally
to the reception and usage of the product. This experience was not part of a
connected relationship. The episode was triggered by the customer’s
realization that the printouts were of poor quality. The only information
flow took the form of a customer purchase (and even that took a detour by
going through a retailer). And it was left entirely to the customer to decide
that purchasing toner for the JetPro 6978 was the right solution for his
printing needs.
    The respond-to-desire connected customer experience was primarily one
of reducing the friction associated with the transaction. This could be
accomplished via a simple ordering interface (e.g., one-click shopping),
conveniently located sensors (e.g., Amazon Dash buttons), or voice
recognition (e.g., Google Assistant). All of this dramatically reduces the
customer effort compared with ordering via cumbersome websites,
telephone, or mail or making a trip to the store.
   While the curated offering connected experience also relies on the
customer as the trigger of the transaction, it puts the firm in a more active
position of helping the customer figure out a solution to her needs. Central
to this is the recommendation process. Based on past purchases (the
customer spends two hours per day streaming World War I documentaries)
or expressed preferences (“I really like Bollywood movies”), Netflix can
make recommendations to the customer on how to fulfill her entertainment
needs. This recommendation process requires data about the customer,
increasing the need for information frequency and information richness.
The more the firm knows, the better a recommendation it can make.
Technical challenges for this connected relationship include a strong
recommendation technology. Moreover, firms need to deal with the demand
for privacy by customers, as became obvious when Google was criticized
for reading through its customers’ Gmail accounts to improve targeted
advertising.
   Because overcoming customer inertia is one of the main benefits of the
coach behavior connected relationship, we cannot rely on the customer to
be the trigger for transactions. Instead, the trigger point is moved to the
firm. That has consequences for the other dimensions as well. The firm
needs to be receiving information from the customer all the time so that it
doesn’t miss the right moment to take action. In this case, the connection to
the firm is always on, and customers send information to a firm
continuously and quite often autonomously. You could say the firm is
automatically “hovering” over the customer. For instance, a customer’s
Fitbit is continually gathering information, using the customer’s smartphone
as a relay device to automatically send information to a health care provider
or the customer’s personal trainer. The technical challenge for this
connected relationship lies in enabling cheap and reliable two-way
communication between customer and firm, reflecting the fact that
communication in this case has to happen 24/7.
   Finally, as we move to automatic execution, the firm takes on all
responsibility for finding the right solution to the customer’s needs. There is
an important difference between a fall sensor that waits for its user to press
an alarm button and a device that issues a distress call based on the reading
of an accelerometer. The sensor has to be read continuously and ideally
transmits information in real time so that even in the rare event that the
device is damaged in a fall, help can still be sent without delay. Technically,
this raises the bar for the ability to correctly infer the right product or
service for the customer based on the automatically transmitted information.
Recommending a bad movie or reminding a male patient to make a
gynecology appointment might lead to customer annoyance. Shipping a
Brother cartridge to the user of an HP printer, in contrast, has more
significant costs associated with it, but even these costs are small when
compared with the damage done by a failure to call a much-needed
ambulance.




      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DEEP
                   LEARNING
As we have seen in our discussion in this chapter, there often is more to
connected customer relationships than just providing customers with what
they ask for. Curated offering, coach behavior, and automatic execution all
rely on joint problem solving between the customer and the firm. In the
past, such joint problem-solving behavior was only possible through human
experts, oftentimes sales managers who would help the customer to
determine which product or service was right for them and when and how
to acquire it.
   Thanks to advances in artificial intelligence, human skills can now be
vastly augmented and more and more processes can be automated. The field
of artificial intelligence is concerned with equipping machines with skills
that previously could only be mastered by humans, thereby enabling them
to not just execute orders but solve problems instead.
   It is helpful to distinguish between two ways a computer can help in the
customer journey. The first one is based on applying a (potentially large) set
of rules, such as “propose paper to everybody who has purchased toner” or
“reorder milk whenever the last bottle has been opened.” Such rules can be
carefully audited, making sure they lead to desired recommendations, but
they have an important drawback. Every aspect of the problem needs to be
coded in the form of a rule, which can quickly lead to an explosion of rules
(e.g., if customers leave for vacation, a query of the calendar might also be
required, so that milk is not reordered in this case).
   Coding everything in rules might work for low-complexity situations
such as ordering toner or milk. In situations of high complexity, however, it
is much harder to codify knowledge in the form of rules (what exactly
makes one skin irregularity an indicator of a risk of cancer?). This is where
the second way in which a computer can solve a problem comes in. Rather
than defining rules for identifying skin cancer, the computer gets fed a very
large number of skin images and is informed which are cancerous and
which aren’t. Based on patterns the computer finds in these old images
(often referred to as the training set), the computer then evaluates future
images.
   This approach is much more humanlike—after all, we do not tell our
children what exactly makes an animal a cat; they just figure it out from
observing many animals and listening to our parental classification. (It turns
out that determining whether a video includes a cat has been a much-studied
problem in computer science and has attracted the attention of some of the
greatest minds in that field.) The technical term for this learning approach is
training a neural network.
   Such digital representations of neural networks have been around for
many decades. Recently, a breakthrough in this area has been achieved,
referred to as deep learning. Deep learning is inspired by the human brain
and organizes the neural network into multiple layers, each layer using
different levels of abstraction. For example, when looking for a cat in a
digital image, the first level might identify the pixels on the image that
constitute the edges separating one object from another. The second level
might be concerned with the task of translating the edges into objects (such
as the leg of the cat, the ears of the cat, or the couch under the cat). The
third level might group the objects, and the fourth level might determine
whether a group of objects is a cat. This approach requires lots of data and
computing power, but it does not need prespecified rules.
   Because of the repeat dimension in our framework (see the next chapter),
firms pursuing a connected strategy have access to the data required for
deep learning, making them a better partner in joint problem solving with
the customer than their (unconnected) competitors.
The Different Domains for Different
Connected Customer Experiences
While we are excited about the emergence and possibilities of new
customer experiences related to automatic execution, we want to stress that
we do not see them as the best solution to all problems or for all customers.
In other words, connected relationships are not always becoming better as
you move from the left to the right in table 4-1.
   Customers differ in the degree to which they feel comfortable if things
begin to happen automatically around them. An experience that is magical
for one person might be creepy to another. One person might find it
delightful that Disney sends them an automatically created picture book of
their last visit to Disneyworld. Another customer might find it invasive. Not
only do customers differ in what value drivers (or pain points) are
particularly salient to them, but they also differ in the degree to which they
are comfortable with sharing data and having the environment around them
act on that data. Understanding which connected customer experience is
best suited for a particular customer is as important as understanding the
particular needs of this customer. Transparency and the ability of customers
to opt in or opt out is key in this respect. Unless you have asked the
customer whether it is OK for you to collect data, and unless you have
explained very clearly how you will use this data and how this use will
create value for the customer, you run the big risk of alienating rather than
delighting your customers.
   In sum, each of the four connected customer experiences has its own
merits and works well in specific-use cases and for particular customers:

      Respond-to-desire works best when customers know what they want
      and the firm is capable of providing it quickly. The problem is that
      fulfilling a random customer request, such as “I want to eat a bacon
      cheeseburger now, even though I am in a vegetarian restaurant and it
      is three o’clock in the morning,” can be costly or impossible. The
      firm’s essential capability is an operational one: fast delivery,
flexibility, and exact execution. Customers who like to be in the
driver’s seat, having full control, like respond-to-desire.
Curated offering makes sense when customers don’t know exactly
what they want because they don’t know all the available options. In
this setting, a firm can delight its customers by finding them a product
best suited to their needs, and also gain efficiency benefits by
proactively steering them toward something that can be easily
provided. The key capability here is the recommendation process.
Customers who like to make the final decision but still value advice
benefit from curated offering.
Coach behavior is of the most value for latent needs that customers
are aware of but have a hard time pursuing themselves, because of
inertia or some other behavioral reason. Yes, the customer wants a
bacon cheeseburger, but once reminded of his cholesterol levels, he is
willing to order a salad. For this to work, the firm needs to have a
deep understanding of customers’ needs. This is often based on a rich
information flow from the customer to the firm via automated
hovering. It also needs to balance keeping the customer engaged and
loyal with being parental and restrictive. Customers who do not mind
sharing personal data if they see a clear payback in terms of being
able to achieve personal goals are willing to engage in a coach
behavior customer experience.
Automatic execution should be the connected relationship of choice
only if the firm is able to understand the user so well that it is better
positioned to make purchase (or other) decisions than the user herself.
It also requires a setting in which mistakes are not too consequential.
Customers who are comfortable with having a continuous data stream
from themselves (or their devices) to a firm and who trust that the
firm uses the data to fulfill their needs at a reasonable cost will be the
most open to an automatic execution customer experience.
   Table 4-2 summarizes the connected experiences alongside the domains
for which they are best suited and the capabilities a firm needs in order to
create these customer experiences.
Recognize-Request-Respond: A
Broader View of Satisfying
Customer Needs
When we ask managers to list the drivers of willingness-to-pay of their
customers, their main focus is usually on tangible and intangible aspects of
their products or services, such as quality attributes and brand. Obviously,
these are important factors, but the willingness-to-pay of a customer can be
influenced by a much broader set of drivers. Every transaction your
customer has with you is actually an entire journey, and at every step of this
journey there is an opportunity to either delight your customer or have your
customer suffer a pain point. We find it helpful to distinguish three phases
of the customer journey: recognize—the part of the journey where a latent
need of the customer arises and either the customer or the firm is made
aware of it; request—the part of the journey where the need is translated
into a request for a solution to the particular need; and finally respond—the
part of the journey where the customer receives and experiences the
solution.
   Our research into connected strategies has revealed four distinct
approaches that firms use to reduce the friction of this customer journey—
in other words, four different connected customer experiences. These
customer experiences are distinguished by what part of the customer
journey they affect. The respond-to-desire connected customer experience
starts at the point in the journey when a customer knows precisely what he
or she wants. The firm’s goal is to make it as easy as possible for the
customer to order, pay for, and receive the desired product in the desired
quantity. The curated offering customer experience acts further upstream in
the journey by helping the customer find the best possible option that would
fulfill his or her needs. Both respond-to-desire and curated offering can only
work if customers are aware of their needs. Firms creating a coach behavior
customer experience help their customers at exactly that part of their
journey: they raise awareness of needs and nudge the customer into action.
Lastly, when the firm is able to be aware of a customer need even before the
customer is aware of it, it is possible to create an automatic execution
customer experience, where the firm solves the need of the customer
proactively.
   We want to reiterate that automatic execution should not be seen as the
most desirable customer experience for every transaction. Customers differ
in how much agency they prefer, and for some transactions the risk of
getting it wrong with automatic execution outweighs the benefits. While
technologists might see automatic execution as nirvana, good old-fashioned
customer understanding is necessary to offer the most relevant experience
to your customers, which may require you to create a range of connected
customer experiences.
                                     5

                              Repeat
                  Building Customer
                 Relationships to Create
                 Competitive Advantage


Henry Ford’s quip on color choices for his legendary Model T illustrates the
trade-off between willingness-to-pay and production efficiency: “Any
customer can have a car painted any color that he wants so long as it is
black.” Ford had no proclivity for black paint. His first car, the Model A,
came in red, and the Model F was primarily sold in green. Instead, Ford’s
cookie-cutter strategy and one-size-fits-all paradigm came to favor
production efficiency over customization.
   That same production efficiency preference extends beyond
manufacturing to the world of education, an industry that in the United
States employs some 3 million K–12 teachers and another 1.7 million
faculty in postsecondary education. Curricula are standardized. In France,
the Ministry of Education dictates what every student will learn each day. In
England, it’s called the National Curriculum. Curricula are the assembly
instructions for the production facilities of education.
   Having a curriculum is not a bad thing. It holds teachers accountable and
helps students achieve predefined learning objectives. It also helps
coordinate across courses and schools, and fosters the sharing of best
practices. Nevertheless, a standardized curriculum wastes an enormous
opportunity for customization. Students have varying motivation, prior
knowledge, and maybe talent. A student going through K–12 education will
interact with some one hundred teachers and counselors, each one following
a different piece of the curriculum.
   What is the alternative, short of providing each kid with a set of private
teachers? Fortunately, there are alternatives made possible by connected
strategies. Consider the following three examples.
   In 2006, Salman Khan, an MIT-trained computer scientist with an MBA
from Harvard, launched a revolution in K–12 education called Khan
Academy. Khan, at that time employed by a hedge fund in Boston, had been
tutoring his cousin Nadia, who was struggling with basic math problems
and couldn’t get placed in a more advanced class. In addition to phoning
her, Khan used a technology called Yahoo Doodle to scribble on a virtual
notepad that he shared with Nadia through the internet. As this tutoring
proved to be effective, he started teaching her siblings. By 2006, word about
his remarkable teaching skills got out and Khan started to upload on
YouTube simple videos of himself scribbling notes with some voice
annotation. It was the foundation for what became the nonprofit Khan
Academy. Ten years later, Khan Academy has over one hundred employees
and has amassed twenty thousand videos used by fifty million students and
schools around the world.
   As a second example, consider the recent development of smart
textbooks for college students, discussed in chapter 1. For many generations
of students, the only touch point between student and publisher was the
retail store, either brick-and-mortar or online. Thanks to online books, a
digital connection is now made with the student every time the book is
opened. What is the benefit of this? First, publishers (and professors) can
track learning activities such as reading or homework preparation. Not only
is such automated grading more efficient for the college, it also provides
immediate feedback to the student. Immediate feedback is essential for
learning. Rather than waiting for the final exam and getting a C because of
insufficient preparation, the student knows where he or she stands with
respect to the learning objectives of the course and thus can take any
necessary corrective actions quickly and without compromising the final
grade. Mistakes are made early in the learning journey, and the smartbook
guides the student by showing recorded videos of solutions to similar
problems or by redirecting the student to the relevant chapters. When the
student is ready to move on, the learning activities can be completed in
thirty minutes. If, however, the student struggles, the book is patient and
guides the student through more hours of learning. Second, the learning
activities of the student population create data, often referred to as
metadata. Professors can use such metadata to decide what topics need
further clarification in the upcoming class sessions. Authors and publishers
can use the metadata in deciding what to write and publish next.
   Finally, consider the example of Lynda.com, a company that was
acquired by LinkedIn for $1.5 billion. Started by Lynda Weinman, it offers
video courses geared toward professional skills, such as software
development, graphic design, and business. But learners at Lynda.com don’t
learn for the purpose of passing a test. Instead, they articulate career
objectives by picking a learning path. These paths could be digital marketer,
web developer, or IT security specialist. Lynda.com then provides a bundle
of video instructions, practice assignments, certification, and career
management. Learners use Lynda.com not by simply asking it for one
course (such as Essentials in JavaScript) but by entrusting the site with
broader career objectives (“Make me a web developer”). At the level of the
course, and even more so at the level of a single video lecture, Lynda.com
competes with online courses and free YouTube videos. But having been
entrusted with its learners’ career ambitions, Lynda.com has secured a
position of ongoing personal connection and trust.
   This chapter explores the repeat dimension of connected customer
relationships. Fundamentally, the repeat dimension strengthens the other
three design dimensions that are involved in creating a connected customer
relationship: recognize, request, and respond. As you have likely guessed
by now, we will be drawing examples from the edtech (educational
technology) industry, though many other cases are discussed as well.
   After briefly describing how new technologies have shifted the frontier
in the world of education, we will introduce a four-level framework of
customization. This framework outlines how repeated customer interactions
can be used to shift the frontier defined by willingness-to-pay and
fulfillment costs. The four levels are:

         1. Create unified customer experiences across episodes.
         2. Improve customization based on past interactions.
         3. Learn at the population level to enhance product offerings.
         4. Become a trusted partner to the customer.
A Shift in the Efficiency Frontier in
Education
Earlier, we discussed the concept of the efficiency frontier. Firms face a
trade-off between lowering their costs and increasing their customers’
willingness-to-pay by providing them with better or more convenient
products or services. In chapter 2, we saw how Blue Apron and Uber
shifted this frontier in their respective industries to raise the customers’
willingness-to-pay while paradoxically lowering costs.
   What does the efficiency frontier look like in education? If you go back
in history, private teachers educating the aristocratic elite through one-on-
one tutoring seems to be one of the earliest forms of formal education. The
power of one-on-one instruction is obvious: The teacher can spend all her
effort and attention on the unique needs of one student. Content and speed
of instruction can be customized. If the private teacher comes to the
student’s home (or castle), convenience for the student is also maximized.
But it is very costly and inefficient from the perspective of the teacher. In
the modern era, the teacher would much rather explain the concept of
quadratic equations once to a class of thirty rather than having thirty
students individually try to learn this skill during her office hours. From an
efficiency point of view, it would be even better to give the lecture of
quadratic equations in a huge lecture hall, as is commonly done in
introductory courses at universities. At the same time, the student’s
happiness and effectiveness of learning is reduced. We can see this trade-off
in figure 5-1. (Recall that willingness-to-pay reflects the benefits that a
student receives, not the price the student is actually paying.)
FIGURE 5-1

The traditional efficiency frontier in education




    Private teaching is what Khan provided to his cousin Nadia, much to her
benefit. This was only possible because of the love and empathy of her
uncle. Let’s do a quick back-of-the-envelope calculation of the costs of
having this particular private tutor. As a Harvard MBA working at a hedge
fund, Khan likely made somewhere between $500,000 and $1 million per
year. Even if he worked many hours per day and rarely took a day off, his
average hourly compensation must have been between $300 and $400 per
hour. But in an educational setting, a cost of over $300 per hour per student
is not a scalable model.
    Now let us turn our attention to quality, or how much a student benefits
from a particular way education is delivered. Most likely, these benefits are
a function of the following factors:

       The quality of the instructor
       The customization of the content relative to the student’s interests,
       career ambitions, and learning style
       The degree to which the speed of instruction is customized to the
       ability of the student
       The convenience of the educational service in terms of the timing and
       location of classes

   Because of economies of scale, teaching classes of one hundred is much
more efficient than teaching classes of ten. This is the reason why
educational institutions have long discussions about faculty-student ratios.
But the trade-off is that, in classes of one hundred, it is hard to customize
either the content or the speed of instruction, not to mention the timing and
location of the class.
   This brings us back to the idea of shifting the frontier. When the
instructional videos produced by Khan were uploaded on YouTube, the cost
of production, including his time, was amortized by many more students.
On YouTube, EdX, or Coursera, many video lectures have been watched by
tens of thousands. Even if we factor in the costs of production, including
expenses such as video editing and production (which make it more
expensive than simply lecturing in front of students), the cost per lecture per
student is reduced to pennies.
   But what about the student benefits derived from such video lectures?
Aren’t they just as bad as Ford’s slogan, “Any customer can have a car
painted any color that he wants so long as it is black”? The answer has been
the biggest surprise to all those active in online teaching: no. To understand
why, let’s go back to the drivers of student benefits mentioned earlier.
   First, consider the quality of the instructor. Hundreds of years ago, those
seeking entertainment and amusement would go to the local market to
watch a clown or acrobat. Clowns were not making fortunes, but there was
enough demand for this type of labor that pretty much any town would
bring enough business to support its own clown. The clown profession,
however, changed abruptly with the introduction of film technology. In
times of movie theaters, the production of films was centralized, reducing
the cost per laugh and limiting the demand for clown labor. For clowns, this
was a sad story, but not so for the audience. Because the best clowns would
star in the movies, the audience now could watch those who were really
funny. Teachers and clowns have more in common than most in our
profession would like to admit. With 3 million teachers in the United States,
we have about 250,000 teachers per grade level. If we further break this up
by subject, we end up with some 50,000 math teachers in eighth grade.
Every one of these 50,000 teachers will explain the concept of quadratic
equations each year. Most of them will do it well. Nevertheless, the idea of
watching the very best teacher on video is increasingly appealing to
students and parents alike.
   Who teaches where has long limited the ability of schools to offer a wide
range of topics. For instance, which foreign language you learned in
elementary school, if you had the privilege of learning one at all, depended
on which school you attended. Few elementary schools have the resources
to teach French, Spanish, Mandarin, German, and Hebrew. In contrast,
platforms like Rosetta Stone that serve a national and even global market
have scale. They are thus in a much better position to provide students with
the language instruction they desire.
   The award for Most Popular Customization Tool in Online Education
(we made that up) should be given to the pause button on the video player.
In a lecture hall with one hundred students, there are only so many times a
teacher or professor can pause and repeat herself. Online, there are no
limits. If a student is distracted, the content is difficult, or the explanation of
the professor is unclear, all it takes is a click and the video is paused,
allowing the student to reflect and replay. As experienced online teachers,
we also learned from our students that the second-most-popular tool is that
for adjusting the video speed. Apparently, when watched at 1.5 times the
normal speed, some of our most boring lectures become tolerable.
   Finally, there is the effect of convenience. The new generation of
learners, whom we as professors now teach, grew up with online devices
and are accustomed to the “anytime, anywhere” paradigm of our society.
From Khan Academy to smartbooks and from Rosetta Stone to Lynda.com,
convenience is a key need and expectation of many users that we as
educators might not welcome but must embrace.
   Before we continue, a clarifying comment is in order. Being both parents
and experienced online teachers, we by no means want to imply that kids
should be educated by video instruction alone. Teachers will always play an
important role in education. Nevertheless, technology has changed the way
education is organized and has shifted the frontier, leading to bigger student
benefits at lower costs. The following sections dive into greater detail on
how the repeat dimension especially can shift the frontier in education and
other industries.
Create Unified Customer
Experiences across Episodes:
Strengthen “Recognize”
Up to this point, we have discussed customer experiences with firms by
looking at one episode or transaction at a time. But the greatest potential of
connected strategies lies in creating deep, ongoing relationships with
customers that weave together multiple experiences. The repeat dimension
is thus fundamental in transforming stand-alone experiences into
relationships. The first step to achieve this goal might sound trivial, but it is
essential and turns out to be quite difficult: you need to be able to identify
the customer and treat him or her as the same person whenever you interact,
regardless of when and where this interaction takes place. Only if you keep
track of your customers will you be able to learn more about them—that is,
improve the recognize dimension of connected customer relationships.
   Such a customer-centric view is remarkably uncommon. For instance, in
the world of education, students traditionally interact with the school or
university one course at a time, and it is up to the student to stitch together a
coherent experience. A connected strategy approach, in contrast, focuses on
the learner, not the course. This allows the aggregation of otherwise
disjointed learning experiences into one unified learning journey. Teachers
and counselors have access to the data of past student performance, and no
student falls through the cracks, which increases the quality of the
instruction. Costs also come down at the same time by saving teacher and
counselor time that is otherwise spent trying to make sense of poor student
performance that could have been predicted (and avoided) much earlier.
   Similarly, in the world of health care, most of us have experienced the
annoyance of checking in at a physician’s office. How many times must we
as patients provide our medical history, our allergies, and our insurance
information? Wouldn’t it be nice if, when our sleep pattern suddenly
becomes abnormal, our physician is put into the loop? Chances are that if
we are Apple Watch users, Apple now knows more about our health than
our doctor, for whom we are patients when sitting in the exam room but
strangers when we are not.
    The problem of orchestrating all interactions and weaving them together
into a unified customer experience is harder than it first appears. The reason
lies in the fact that many companies now interact with each customer
through multiple channels. This creates at least two problems.
    The first is a technological one. Complex businesses with multiple
product lines often do not use a single database or IT infrastructure. For
instance, when a firm interacts with a customer through both traditional
brick-and-mortar retailing and online channels (omni-channel retailing), it
is quite problematic to track that customer across all her interactions with
the firm’s various touch points.
    This leads us to the second problem, an organizational one. The reason
for the multiple IT systems is often historical. Different business units
develop their own processes and systems, a problem that is exacerbated
when divisions are added through mergers and acquisitions. Moreover,
these units often fight for internal resources or compete for status and career
slots. So, when a customer who was well advised by an employee in a retail
store ends up buying a product from the online branch of the same retailer,
the store manager might view him as a customer who was lost to another
unit. Similarly, consider Disney. To generate the amazing guest experiences
that we described previously, Disney had to overcome exactly these
challenges:

      The data related to a given customer was scattered among (for
      example) the Disney video games the customer had on her
      PlayStation, the retail store at which she purchased the last piece of
      Disney apparel, the Disney movie she saw on Netflix, the Disney
      theme park she visited last year, and the Disney Hotel she stayed in.
      Integrating this into a single customer relationship is not easy, but
      without integration, how could Bill, who was acting as Captain Jack
      Sparrow in Disney’s Anaheim park, remember that little Sydney had
      seen Bill’s colleague, François, in Disney’s Paris park last year?
      Even though they are part of the same company, theme parks have to
      be profitable, and so do feature films. To move from a product-line-
      (channel)-based view of the world to one that puts the customer in the
      center of all transactions requires strong vision and leadership support
     from above. Traditionally, it was the customer who had to navigate
     Disney’s organizational chart in order to stitch together a seamless
     experience. As part of the MagicBand implementation, organizational
     changes had to be executed as well.

   But Disney did it, and you already know the results from chapter 1. Not
only did the guest experience improve, but in many cases, the costs also
dropped. Where it was once necessary to manually weave together
transactions across channels and time when handling special customer
requests or complaints, now a seamless customer experience can be
delivered with high efficiency.
Improve Customization Based on
Past Interactions: Strengthen
“Request”
While the first level of customization is all about keeping track of and
getting to know the customer across individual transactions with the firm,
the second level is about turning this information into actionable
knowledge. The firm needs to use the information about a customer’s needs
to translate it into a specific request for an appropriate product or service.
To understand which product or service is most appropriate, the firm needs
to understand which willingness-to-pay drivers are particularly important
for a given customer.
    In the last chapter, we introduced the concept of the customer journey
(see figure 4-1). At each step of this customer journey are a number of
possible willingness-to-pay drivers. Understanding these drivers is essential
to customizing the customer’s experience. (We will guide you through this
process in the next workshop chapter.) Most importantly, what the customer
journey highlights is that your customer’s willingness-to-pay is driven not
only by the product or service itself (the “what”) but also by how a
customer interacts with you and how the customer can access your
products.
    For instance, convenience of access has become an ever more important
element of customization. Again, the world of education provides an
illustration. In the old world of brick-and-mortar education, physical
campuses and class schedules created a rigid delivery system. In today’s
world, “anywhere and anytime” has become the mantra of online education,
especially in the market of educating busy professionals. Thus, physical
campuses and fixed class schedules are inconveniences that negatively
impact the customer willingness-to-pay.
    Customization goes beyond the ability to access content anytime the
learner wants. While it sounds great to have access to tens of thousands of
educational videos around the clock, the options can be overwhelming.
Maybe a learner wants to become a web developer. Coursera, EdX, and
even YouTube have plenty of video material that the learner would benefit
from. But where to start? As mentioned earlier, Lynda.com bundles videos
so that they collectively correspond to a career track. It takes the expressed
need of the learner (“I want to become a web developer”) and turns it into a
solution (“Take JavaScript first, then take a course on interface design,”
etc.). This is the idea of curation leading to customization. The smartbook at
McGraw-Hill takes customization one step further still. Beyond reacting to
explicitly expressed user needs, it also infers customer needs based on past
interactions. Past reading and test-taking behaviors are analyzed and used
for future curation.
   This is the skill that Amazon has mastered so well. By observing our
past browsing and buying behavior, Amazon is able to infer our needs.
Moreover, it creates a virtuous cycle. The more a firm engages in business
with somebody, the more it learns about the customer and the better it is
able to customize future offerings. The better the firm customizes its
offerings, the more delighted the customer becomes, bringing the customer
back again and again, creating even more information for the firm. At some
point, the customization becomes so good that customers get locked in and
stop taking their business to competitors. Recent data shows that Amazon
has more than 40 percent market share of online retail. This feedback loop
is visualized in figure 5-2. Given one customer, a firm learns more and
more about what that one customer needs. This creates a positive feedback
loop: recognize, request, respond, and repeat, then recognize, request, and
respond even better, and so on.

FIGURE 5-2

Learning at the level of the individual customer
Learn at the Population Level to
Enhance Product Offerings:
Strengthen “Respond”
We recently worked with a telecommunications executive who shared the
following story. He was at the checkout counter at a large home-
improvement store. The cashier asked for his zip code, to which he
responded, “I will tell you my zip code if you give me a 5 percent discount.
In fact, if you give me 10 percent off, I will tell you the street I live on.”
The clerk called the manager, who took the deal!
    It is said that, in this connected world, customers pay not just with their
wallets but also with their data. We will discuss this theme further in
chapter 8. For now, let us simply observe that knowing your zip code and
your street address does not just allow the store to serve you better; the store
can also transfer this knowledge to better serve other customers like you.
Conversely, it can use the data on customers like you to help in predicting
what you might need. This is the first advantage that comes from
population-level learning. The firm can move beyond using an individual’s
data to help that person by using aggregate data to make customized
suggestions or decisions for each of its customers.
    Population-level data makes even more powerful learning possible. By
learning about its customer population, the firm can create a better product
or service offering. After all, what good is it to have a deep understanding
of your customers’ needs if you don’t have the products or services
available to satisfy those needs? True customization requires not only
understanding the customer deeply but also having the right product and
services available. Thus, level 3 of customization is fundamentally about
strengthening your ability to respond.
    First, consider examples from the world of education. Learning analytics
is emerging as a hot new field. If we can predict which students are likely to
struggle in a course, we can take corrective action before problems occur.
Teachers can learn where individual students or entire classes are likely to
struggle, allowing them to proactively alter what they offer in their courses.
The same can be true for authors like us. If, for example, we knew that
learners love the worksheets in chapter 3 but rarely use the ones in chapter
10, we could improve this book. In fact, we hope to achieve exactly this
through our website, connected-strategy.com.
    A parallel trend is playing out in medicine. Under the label of
personalized medicine or precision medicine, health care companies mine
genomics data in the hope of finding predictive patterns for who will
develop Alzheimer’s or cancer, among a range of illnesses. For example,
the genetic testing firm 23andMe is establishing itself as a valuable partner
to biotech companies as it amasses the genetic profiles of millions of
people.
    As a firm learns more about its customers, it can also broaden the set of
customer experiences that it creates. Consider Square, a financial services
provider founded in 2009. Square started out by providing small businesses
with a lower-cost option for accepting payments via credit cards. Through
its Square readers (small electronic devices for swiping cards), Square helps
its clients to improve their respond-to-desire strategies. Over time, as
Square learned more about the needs of its clients, it created curated
offerings that included new features such as tailored dashboards providing
information about the end customers and new services such as payroll
systems. The information contained in the Square system also allows small
businesses to provide more curated offerings to their customers—for
instance, via targeted advertising. Lastly, Square has started to offer an
automatic execution experience by automatically issuing lines of credit in
real time based on the merchant’s cash flow.
    As these examples illustrate, population-level learning allows firms to
refine their product portfolio in two different ways. First, learning about
demand allows a firm to better choose which products it should carry. The
second type of portfolio adjustment is more radical. As a firm learns more
about its customers, it might get deeper insights into them than any of its
suppliers have. These insights might then allow the firm to backward
integrate and produce (or direct suppliers to produce) brand-new products.
Consider Zalando, one of the largest German online fashion retailers.
Zalando started as a copycat of Zappos, the largest online retailer of
footwear in the United States. Zalando initially focused on providing a
respond-to-desire customer experience. Over time, as Zalando learned more
about its customers, and customers were willing to share personal
information and fashion preferences, Zalando was able to add curated
offering activities, matching individual customers with selected items that
are presented to them through the company’s website. Eventually, Zalando
was also able to use the data it gathered to start a private-label brand. From
searches on its website, Zalando had customer data for which price points
and product categories customers rarely used a “brand” filter. Zalando
realized that for these products, its customers didn’t care much about the
brand name. Therefore, Zalando started to offer its own products in these
categories. (See the sidebar for another example of repeat in action.)
    Again, we can observe a virtuous cycle, a positive feedback loop. The
larger the set of customers a firm serves, the more information it can gather
to fine-tune its existing product portfolio through better assortment or the
creation of new products. The better its product portfolio, the more likely it
is that it can find a good match between the needs of a customer and its
product offering. This good match, in turn, leads to customer satisfaction
and expands the customer pool, again creating more data.




        ASTHMA INHALERS IN THE REPEAT
                   LOOP
Nonadherence to medication is a key cost driver in health care systems
around the world. In the United States alone, $100 billion to $300 billion of
avoidable health care cost has been attributed to nonadherence. It’s
particularly problematic for long-term, chronic diseases where patients are
not always symptomatic. For instance, the World Health Organization has
estimated that almost half of all prescribed medication for asthma is not
being used. This can lead to costly emergency room visits, hospitalizations,
and emotional trauma, as many parents can attest if they have endured late-
night hospital visits for a child with an acute asthma attack. No wonder
many firms are trying to reduce these costs, while providing more value to
patients, via connected strategies. Consider the SmartInhaler developed by
New Zealand–based Adherium. The SmartInhaler is a Bluetooth-enabled
sensor that wraps around the patient’s existing inhaler. The device sends
information via an app to the patient, or parents, and health care
professionals to track medication adherence. After learning the average
usage pattern of a patient, the app also sends the patient reminders or alerts
if a dosage is missed. Over time, the app learns more about a patient and
can start predicting when asthma may strike, allowing the patient to
preempt attacks. The device contains a range of sensors that allow feedback
to the user not only about whether the medication has been taken but also
about whether the inhaler has been primed correctly and pointed accurately
inside the mouth to deliver the full dosage to the respiratory system. Given
its information on its population of users, Adherium has been able to
provide valuable feedback to AstraZeneca, the maker of the inhaler, to help
it redesign the inhaler so that it is more likely to be used correctly. In this
case, we can see the repeat dimension in full play. Over time, the app learns
more and more about a particular patient, allowing it to improve its coach
behavior. Likewise, learning at the population level allows the app to
improve its analytics with respect to predicting asthma attacks, thus
improving the device over time.


FIGURE 5-3

Population-level learning




   Figure 5-3 illustrates this positive feedback loop. Unlike figure 5-2,
which was all about finding what is best for one particular customer in
order to provide a better curation, metadata enables learning about many
customers.
Become a Trusted Partner to the
Customer: Recognizing Deeper
Needs
As a firm learns more about its customers, it also has the opportunity to
move from addressing one or more narrow needs to focusing on more
fundamental ones. A narrow need is to learn about compound interest rates.
A more fundamental need is to be able to ascertain the value of an
investment. More fundamental still is the desire to become an investment
adviser. When a learner entrusts her career dreams to Lynda.com,
customization can be done at a whole new level because Lynda.com can
take a more active role in the connected relationship. Beyond curation, the
firm might nudge the learner to keep on top of her homework (coach
behavior) or even automatically sign her up for an important job fair.
    The distinction between narrow needs and more fundamental ones is also
relevant in the field of health care. If a patient feels some heart palpitations,
the narrow need is to talk to a cardiologist. More broadly, what this patient
wants is to have the health care provider deal with her cardiac problems.
Actually, what the patient really wants is for her health care team to provide
the right health care when needed. Most fundamentally, what the person
wants is for her health care team to keep her healthy. Thus, we can identify
a hierarchy of needs in which the current request is an expression of a
higher-level, more general need. The promise of connected strategy is that
through repeated interaction, a firm is able to move up this hierarchy of
needs and embed each user experience in a deeper relationship between the
firm and the customer. In doing so, firms can address more fundamental
drivers of customer value, increasing a firm’s value proposition.
    A helpful approach to discover such deeper relationships by addressing
more fundamental needs is the why-how ladder. Figure 5-4 provides an
illustration for our cardiology example. Each of the boxes in the why-how
ladder corresponds to a specific problem definition. Problem definitions at
the bottom of the ladder are more focused, addressing how a need could be
fulfilled. We climb up the ladder by asking why. Why is that problem
relevant in the first place? Why would it be good to fulfill this customer
need?
   Going up the why-how ladder accomplishes two goals. First, it aligns the
search for solutions with what the customer really cares about. Again,
patients don’t really care that much about their cardiologist; they just want
to make sure that their heart is in good shape and, even more broadly, that
they are healthy. That’s the most relevant problem for the patient, and
whoever provides the solution to this problem is likely to win the
competition to serve this patient.
   Second, this understanding opens up alternative solution approaches:
solving the problem of providing easy access to a busy cardiologist is hard.
At this level in the why-how ladder, our solution space is limited to finding
more cardiologists and making them work faster or longer hours. But as we
go up to the problem of keeping a patient’s heart healthy, there exist many
alternative solutions, ranging from changing exercise routines and nutrition
to reinforcing medication adherence. For every dollar that we spend, we
might be able to improve patient cardiac health by a lot more if we invest in
methods to reinforce medication adherence or lifestyle management. This
improves efficiency.
FIGURE 5-4

The why-how ladder for cardiology problems
In the eyes of the customer, the purpose of the relationship with our firm is to …




    Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania conducted clinical studies
on cardiac health and found some interesting results. Prior studies had
shown that many of those discharged from the hospital after being treated
for major cardiac problems were not willing or able to stay on their
medication for longer than six months. Using pill bottles connected to the
internet, the Penn research team could quickly detect when patients forgot
to take their medications. By automatically hovering over the patient this
way, deviations can be detected early and patients can be engaged and
trained to form healthy behaviors. The researchers used small financial
incentives and peer pressure built through social media to coach patient
behavior, nudging them to stay on their medications and lead a healthier
lifestyle.
    Clearly, a firm needs to earn the trust of the customer before it is
permitted to manage a more fundamental need. This is why we put this at
the fourth and highest level of how the repeat dimension transforms
customer experiences into customized, connected customer relationships.
There is an interesting circularity here: Only if you have a deep connection
with a customer—relying on intensive data exchange—will you be able to
address more fundamental needs. At the same time, unless you are able to
address more fundamental needs, customers likely won’t want to engage in
a deep relationship with your firm in the first place. Deep, embedded
connections can be intrusive; customers will have serious and justifiable
privacy concerns. Unless the value delivered to the customer is high,
customers will not want to engage deeply or may feel that their data is being
exploited without their consent. Thus, you won’t be able to jump straight to
level 4 of customization. Level 4 is achieved in stages. The customer allows
you access to a certain amount of data. Once you have proven to the
customer that this data enables you to make the customer’s life better, the
customer might grant you access to the next slice of data.
   As you can see, the repeat dimension at all four levels of customization
helps a firm to shift the efficiency frontier. A better understanding of
customer needs, a better ability to translate those needs into specific product
requests, and a better assortment of products that fulfill those needs
precisely all increase the willingness-to-pay of customers. At the same time,
a better understanding of demand allows the firm to avoid inefficiencies.
Table 5-1 summarizes the four levels and their impacts on willingness-to-
pay and fulfillment costs.
The Importance of the Repeat
Dimension for Creating Sustainable
Competitive Advantage
The repeat dimension of connected strategies moves the relationship from
episodic transactions to a continuous relationship. Once the individual
transactions are woven together into a customer-centric, unified experience
(level 1), a firm has set itself up to serve its customers better and more
efficiently. This improvement, and the associated shift in the efficiency
frontier, is made possible by two learning mechanisms, summarized in
figure 5-5.
TABLE 5-1

The four levels of customization created by the repeat dimension
Level                                Impact on willingness-to-pay                                     Impact on cost

Level 1: Create unified customer     Customer is treated as one person across channels and            Avoids manual weaving
experiences across episodes          transactions                                                     together of experiences
Level 2: Improve customization       Ability to identify offerings that address the willingness-to-   Avoids costly iterations in case
based on past interactions           pay drivers most important to the particular customer            of failure to fulfill the need
Level 3: Learn at the population     Higher-valued offerings based on inferring customer needs        Data-driven approach to
level to enhance product offerings                                                                    innovation
Level 4: Become a trusted partner    Addressing more fundamental needs allows for alternative         More efficient use of
to the customer                      solutions and early interventions                                resources, as solution space is
                                                                                                      broadened




   The first mechanism plays out at the level of the individual. As a firm
engages in more interactions with that customer, the firm better understands
the customer’s current needs and what products or services would best
fulfill those needs. This is level 2 in our framework. For respond-to-desire
customer experiences, the firm also can help the customer in understanding
and expressing his or her needs more precisely. Thus, the first mechanism
across levels 1 and 2 strengthens the dimensions of recognize and request.
   While it is wonderful to have a deep understanding of your customer
needs, this information is not very valuable unless you have the products or
services available to satisfy those particular needs. The second learning
mechanism operates at the level of the population (or the segment) by
analyzing metadata. This learning creates a feedback into the assortment of
products or even creation of new products in the first place: “Given what
we have learned about customers of varying types, what would be the
optimal assortment to carry or products to create?” In short, this learning
mechanism improves the dimension of respond. This is level 3 in our
framework.

FIGURE 5-5

The positive learning feedback loops created by the repeat dimension




   Together these learning mechanisms allow a firm to enhance the
personalization of its offering. The firm can create a better fit between the
needs of the customer and the product (or service) that responds to this
need. The more Netflix knows about Samantha’s viewing habits, the kinds
of films her friends are tweeting about, or perhaps her upcoming vacation
plans, the better Netflix is able to personalize her viewing recommendations
(“Flying to Italy? Watch Tuscan Wedding to get into the mood!”). At the
same time, as Netflix learns more about entire customer segments, it can
optimize not only what kind of content to license but also what kind of
content to produce. The data Netflix is able to gather from its more than one
hundred million subscribers worldwide has allowed it to create more than
twenty-seven thousand genres, including genres such as 20th-Century
Period Pieces Based on Classic Literature, Absurd Opposites-Attract
Comedies, and Biographical Fashion Documentaries. This fine-grained
categorization, combined with viewer feedback and observed behavior at
both the individual and the population levels, gives Netflix deeper insights
into its audience than any movie studio could ever hope for.
    Eventually, Netflix or other firms will be able to use this information to
move up the hierarchy of needs of their customers and achieve level 4 of
customization. Yes, a customer wants to watch a movie at certain times, but
the deeper need might be entertainment. Once a firm understands a
customer deeply, not only can it suggest movies, but it can also arrange for
tickets to live concerts, automatically record sporting events, and play the
customer’s favorite music in her house and car.
    What makes the repeat dimension so powerful is that it involves positive
feedback effects that over time can create a tremendous, sustainable
competitive advantage for a firm. As we see in figure 5-5, the tight fit
between customer needs and available products—that is, the high degree of
personalization—leads to more value created by the firm, either in the form
of higher willingness-to-pay by the customer or by higher efficiency. This
allows the firm to provide more value to current customers, creating more
future interactions with these customers, which increases the individual-
level learning (the top feedback loop in figure 5-5). At the same time, the
increased value allows the firm to attract new customers, thereby enhancing
the population-level learning (the bottom feedback loop in figure 5-5). With
more learning at the individual and population levels, the firm continuously
improves the recognize, request, and respond dimensions, creating ever-
increasing degrees of personalization. It is a process that feeds on itself and
can allow a firm that gets ahead of its competitors to continue to expand its
competitive advantage.
    Moreover, as a firm is able to improve its knowledge about its
customers’ needs and its ability to service these needs, it has the ability to
move up the hierarchy of needs of its customers. Once the firm has
transformed a series of customer experiences into a true relationship,
customers will be much less likely switch to other firms. Firms with
established connected relationships with their customers do not have to
compete transaction by transaction for the business of their customers
because they have created an effective lock-in. To woo customers away,
competitors have to work much harder than simply offering an occasional
better deal. As a matter of fact, if you are able to reach the status of a
trusted partner, customers are quite likely to become advocates for you,
telling their friends about the great service they receive.
   In our foregoing discussion, we stress the learning feedback loops of the
repeat dimension, as they have been most underappreciated and
underexploited in our experience. As a firm gains more customers, three
better-known positive feedback loops can also arise that will further
strengthen a firm’s competitive advantage.
   First, as a firm attracts more customers, it will enjoy economies of scale:
fixed investments can be spread over a larger customer base. For instance,
Amazon’s investments in recommendation engines, website design, and
technological improvements in Alexa can all be spread over its millions of
customers, giving it a cost advantage over firms with fewer customers.
Economies of scale allow a firm either to offer increasingly better products
without having to raise prices, or to lower its prices to its customers—or
both.
   Second, as firms attract more customers, network effects can arise.
Network effects exist when the willingness-to-pay of customers increases
with the number of other users. For instance, the more that people use
Facebook, the more likely it is that the next user will pick Facebook
because all his or her friends are on this platform. That, in turn, increases
Facebook’s user base even more.
   The third positive feedback loop is a two-sided network effect that exists
when more participants on one side of a transaction increase the value for
the participants on the other side of the transaction, and vice versa. For
instance, the more customers Apple is able to attract to its App Store, the
higher the incentives for software developers to write apps and post them in
the store. At the same time, the more apps that are available, the more
customers are attracted. Likewise, the more that customers use a ride-
hailing service like Lyft, the easier it is to attract new drivers; and
conversely, the more drivers a ride-hailing service has, the shorter the wait
times and the more likely that a customer will choose this particular service.
All of these positive feedback effects create ever-increasing advantages as a
firm grows faster than its competitors.
   As we noted at the end of chapter 2, creating new and superior connected
customer experiences is only the first step of building a successful
connected strategy. If you can utilize technological advances to create a
better customer experience, so can your competitors. But if you can go
through the recognize-request-respond loop more often and learn more than
your competitors each time you repeat the cycle, you can indeed create a
competitive advantage that is sustainable. While all the firms we use as
examples in this book have been innovative in creating new connected
customer experiences, only those that are able to utilize the repeat
dimension thoroughly, and create and exploit the various positive feedback
loops, will be successful in the long run.
The Data Trust Challenge of
Connected Strategies
As we depicted in figure 5-5, two feedback loops are at the heart of a
connected relationship: by repeatedly having interactions with one
particular customer, the firm is able to better and more efficiently serve that
customer; and by obtaining information about many customers, the firm can
better position itself for the future.
   The resulting competitive advantage can lead to market share and
profitability. That is great for the firm, but is it great for the customer? As
firms perfect their service to a particular customer (upper part of figure 5-
5), two investments have to be made. One investment is the data-collection
and analysis effort of the firm—listening carefully to the needs of the
customer and learning from one episode to the next. The second investment
is made by the customer, who has to share information with the firm, be it
actively by answering questions and expressing preferences (“Siri, wake me
up every Monday at seven o’clock and order my coffee from Starbucks”),
or by permitting passive monitoring by the firm (e.g., allowing a fitness app
to track sleep patterns). So, the value that is inherent in a successful
connected relationship, the force that allows the firm to shift the efficiency
frontier, is coproduced by firm and customer.
   This coproduction concept is not just a matter of semantics; it raises
customers’ expectations of how much value they should receive from the
relationship. Unless customers think they are getting a fair share, they may
want to quit the relationship and you will never reach level 4, becoming a
trusted partner.
   More generally, firms will not be able to maintain the repeat dimension if
they lose the trust of their customers. Because a rich information flow from
the customer to the firm is central to a successful connected strategy, data
privacy, data security, and transparent data use are absolutely essential.
   Both the regulatory space and user attitudes toward privacy are likely to
change over time. As a result, guidelines will evolve. Still, privacy
guidelines from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development and the European Union’s General Data Protection
Regulation are good starting points for your considerations. To build a
connected strategy, you will have to have policies that address these
guidelines, including the following:

        1. Collection consent: Whenever you collect data, it should only
           be with the knowledge and consent of the individuals you
           collect it from. Customers should have the right to withdraw
           this consent subsequently.
        2. Data quality: It is your responsibility to keep data accurate and
           up to date for the purposes for which it is to be used.
        3. Purpose: You need to state clearly the purpose for which data
           is collected before collection starts, and that purpose should not
           be changed unless you notify the customer.
        4. Nondisclosure: The data you have collected should not be
           disclosed or made available to others except with the consent of
           the individuals it is collected from.
        5. Safety and breach notification: It is your responsibility to
           protect data against unauthorized access or disclosure. Should a
           breach occur, it is your responsibility to notify your customers
           in a timely manner (within a few days).
        6. Openness: Your customers should be able to easily understand
           who is collecting data and for what purposes.
        7. Access: Your customers should have the right to access the data
           that you have collected and to have corrections made if the data
           is not accurate.
        8. Data portability: Your customers should have the right to
           receive their data in a commonly used and machine-readable
           format and have the right to transmit this data to another firm.
        9. Data erasure: Your customers should have the right to have
           their data erased and to stop further dissemination of their data.
       10. Accountability: You must commit to being held accountable
           for following the foregoing principles.
Four Levels of Customization to
Become a Trusted Partner
The repeat element in a connected customer relationship can often raise a
chicken-and-egg problem:

     To provide a customer the level of customization that fulfills her
     deepest needs requires a strong connection, including large amounts
     of data from prior interactions.
     But to obtain the permission of the customer to collect large amounts
     of data requires that the firm is capable of providing a high level of
     customization and fulfilling the deepest needs of the customer.

   How do you break into this seemingly closed loop? In this chapter, we
have proposed that connected customer relationships get deeper and deeper
over time by moving through four levels of customization:

     Level 1 is about creating a unified customer experience by weaving
     together previously unrelated episodes. Taking a customer-centric
     view, potentially across channels, can create efficiency gains by
     eliminating data reconciliation, is more convenient for the customer,
     and increases the amount of information that a firm has available on a
     particular customer.
     Level 2 uses the data from past interactions to improve customization
     and to learn which products or services are the most important drivers
     of willingness-to-pay—that is, to determine what is truly requested by
     the customer.
     Level 3 is about developing the capability of delivering on those
     drivers when and where desired by the customer. Responding to
     customer requests in an efficient manner requires the firm to
     aggregate information across many customers. This population-level
     learning improves its assortment of product or services.
      Finally, level 4 corresponds to a move of the firm to tackle more
      fundamental needs, evolving from offering rental cars to becoming a
      mobility solution or from being a provider of accounting courses to
      becoming a source for business knowledge.

    As a firm moves from one level to the next, it shifts the efficiency
frontier and strengthens its relationship with its customers, thereby creating
a competitive advantage. Even at the higher levels, the firm still needs to
provide a more attractive option to its customers than its competitors, but it
is freed from competing for every individual transaction. As we will see in
chapter 8, this allows for revenue models that truly focus on long-term
value creation.
                                     6

                         Workshop 2
                 Building Connected
                Customer Relationships


This workshop will systematically guide you in applying the content of the
previous two chapters and assist you in building connected customer
relationships. It has three parts.
   In the first part, we help you diagnose the customer experiences that your
firm currently provides. This will formalize some of what you already did
in the workshop of chapter 3 by using the recognize, request, and respond
dimensions of connected relationships discussed in chapter 4. More
specifically, we will break up this diagnosis into three steps:

         1. Map the current customer journey of one customer experience.
         2. Identify customer willingness-to-pay drivers and pain points.
         3. Capture the information flow for this customer experience.

    The second part of the workshop helps you to look at the relationships
you have with your customers across individual, episodic experiences.
Weaving together these episodes and learning from them to customize
products or services for a particular customer was the first important
element of the repeat dimension discussed in chapter 5. In chapter 5, we
also discussed another element of the repeat dimension, the ability to learn
at the level of the overall customer population.
   The goal of a connected relationship is to move from a transactional
relationship with your customer to becoming a trusted partner. Rather than
only teaching finance, you help somebody make a career as an investment
adviser; rather than only performing surgery, you support health; and rather
than trading stocks, you help somebody save for retirement. This involves
the following two additional diagnostic steps:

         4. Identify the deeper needs of the customer.
         5. Understand the current relationship with your customer across
            separate (repeated) customer experiences.

   In the third part of the workshop, we help you turn the findings of your
diagnosis into new ideas for creating connected relationships:

         6. Identify new opportunities to reduce customer pain points and
            lower fulfillment costs.
         7. Find ways to utilize information gathered from repeated
            interactions to improve the recognize-request-respond cycle.

   Lastly, since trust is at the core of a connected customer relationship, we
ask you to do the following:

         8. Assess your data-protection policies to maintain trust with your
            customers.
Step 1: Map the Current Customer
Journey of One Customer
Experience
Just as you would begin any operational improvement project by mapping
out your current process, we find it helpful to first map the typical journey
your customers are taking when interacting with your organization. This
journey starts with the emergence of a latent need, is followed by a
customer’s recognition of the need and request for something from your
firm, and leads to your firm’s responding to this request. If you have
customer segments that experience very different customer journeys, sketch
out one journey for each customer segment. Likewise, a customer may have
different journeys with you (e.g., “buying insurance” and “dealing with a
claim”). In that case, you again need to sketch out several journeys.
   You can use worksheet 6-1 as a starting point. On this worksheet, we
have outlined the stages of a typical customer journey as we explained them
in chapter 4. For each stage, put an explicit description in each box. What
does the customer actually do at each stage of the customer journey? Here
are some questions you might want to consider for each stage as you fill out
the worksheet:

Latent need

           What are the underlying needs that the customer wants to fulfill?
           What are the underlying problems that the customer is trying to
           solve?

Awareness of need

           When and how does the customer become aware of this need?

Search for options
          How does the customer search for options to fulfill the need?
          How many of the possible options are within the awareness of
          the customer?

Decide on options

          How does the customer decide on what option to choose?
          Who is involved in this decision? What advice does the customer
          seek?

Order and pay

          How does the customer order the option he or she has decided
          on?
          How is the customer being billed?
          How does the customer pay for the order?

Receive

          How long does it take for the product or service to arrive to the
          customer once the order is put in?
          Does the product or service come to the customer, or does the
          customer need to travel to the product or service?

Experience good or service

          How much effort is required before the customer can use the
          product?
          How does the customer use the product?

Postpurchase experience

          What are the postpurchase needs of the customer? Returns?
          Upgrades? Advice? Maintenance? Service? Replacement parts?
WORKSHEET 6-1

Customer journey
Step 2: Identify Customer
Willingness-to-Pay Drivers and Pain
Points
In step 1, you documented the actual steps that a customer is going through
on the customer journey. Now, let’s focus on the willingness-to-pay drivers
and the pain points that the customer encounters along this journey. If you
have completed workshop 1, you already have a head start on this step.
   Hopefully, the concepts we provided to you in the last two chapters
allow your understanding of the willingness-to-pay drivers of your
customers to be more encompassing and precise. For instance, in workshop
1 we asked you to think about inconvenience as a factor that could diminish
willingness-to-pay. Now, with the tool of a customer journey, you can be
more systematic in your analysis of where inconvenience can occur; for
example, it is not only in receiving the product (“Where does the customer
have to go and how long will it take to receive the product?”) but also in the
upfront part of the customer journey, such as in becoming aware of the
need.
   Many customers have a need but are simply not aware of it. If you just
asked customers about their needs, they might not even be able to articulate
them. In fact, a need that a customer is unable to express is the very
definition of a latent need. We will dig deeper into this early stage of the
customer journey in step 4 of this workshop, where we will present you
with a tool to identify the deeper underlying needs that a customer might
have. For now, we will start the customer journey with the stage of
awareness of need.
   Many of the examples we use throughout the book are from business-to-
consumer settings. If you are in a business-to-business setting, you can ask
yourself another overarching question: How can we help our customers
create competitive advantage in their markets? Whatever you can do to help
your customers become more efficient, or to increase the willingness-to-pay
that their products create for their customers, will increase the willingness-
to-pay that your customers have for your products.
   Whether you are in a business-to-consumer or business-to-business
setting, as you are thinking about the various pain points that your customer
encounters, consider the following questions. Keep track of the willingness-
to-pay drivers and pain points on worksheet 6-2. You will use them later in
this workshop as ideas for possible opportunities for improvement.

Awareness of need

           How often is the customer entirely unaware of the need (e.g., the
           customer didn’t realize the computer was at increased risk of
           being hacked)?
           How often does the customer in principle know of the need but
           fail to act on it at the current time and location (e.g., the
           customer knows that she should take a pill but simply forgets)?
           How often does a firm falsely remind the customer of a need that
           the customer actually didn’t have or that was already fulfilled,
           creating customer dissatisfaction?

Search for options

           How do customers identify the options that could fulfill their
           needs? How much time do they spend on the search?
           Are customers generally aware of the most relevant options for
           them, or is the set of options simply too large and complex (e.g.,
           finding the right tile for a bathroom renovation, or the right
           customer relationship management software)? In the normal
           search process, are new options being surfaced for the customer
           that the customer was not aware of, or is the customer mainly
           contemplating previously used solutions?
           How many options do you offer to the customer? What options
           are offered by competitors?

Decide on options

           What factors does the customer take into account in making a
           decision (beyond price)? How easy is it for the customer to
          assess each option for each of these factors?
          Does the customer use any outside help when deciding on an
          option (e.g., review sites, reputation scoring)?
          What role does trust in the provider play in the customer’s
          decision making?
          How much effort does it take the customer to figure out which
          option would fulfill the need in the best way?
          How easy is it for the customer to understand how costly each
          option is (e.g., over the expected lifetime use)?

Order and pay

          Once the customer knows what she is looking for, how long does
          it take her to specify and order the product or service?
          How easy and convenient is it for the customer to specify where
          and when the product is to be delivered or the service is to be
          performed?
          How quickly is the customer being billed? How transparent are
          all charges that the customer incurs?
          How easy is it to pay? What forms of payment are accepted?

Receive

          Where will the customer receive the product? Does the customer
          need to pick it up, or will it be sent to the customer’s desired
          location?
          How long does it take to receive the product after the customer
          has ordered it?
          What happens if the customer is not home when the product is
          delivered?

Experience good or service
           How much effort is required from the customer between
           receiving the product and deriving a benefit from it (time to
           unpack and install)?
           What are the technical features of the product that drive the
           customer’s willingness-to-pay?
           What are the intangible product features, such as brand, image,
           and design, that drive the customer’s willingness-to-pay?
           How good is the fit between the product or service and the
           customer’s needs?
           Does the customer always get the product in the desired portion
           size?
           Does the product gain the customer access to complementary
           products and services (e.g., is it compatible with other third-
           party products, or older, already installed versions)?

Postpurchase experience

           How easy is it to reach customer support?
           Does the firm reduce the risk that the customer has to bear? How
           easy is it to return the product?
           What is the degree of postpurchase flexibility? The customer’s
           needs may change after he or she has purchased the product.
           How easy is it to upgrade or downgrade the product?

WORKSHEET 6-2

Willingness-to-pay drivers and customer pain points at each stage of
the customer journey
Step 3: Capture the Information
Flow for This Customer Experience
Now consider the information flow between your customers and your firm.
Information could be an explicit request for a particular product by the
customer (“I want product xyz”), but it could also be just information about
the customer’s state, be it the condition of the customer’s printer or the
customer’s heart. Thus, information includes everything that the firm may
be able to use to deduce and fulfill the needs of the customer.
   For each of the steps you identified in the customer journey in worksheet
6-1, first describe the information that flows from the customer to you. Note
your answers in the top row of worksheet 6-3. Then, for each information
flow that you have identified, ask yourself the following questions:

           What or who triggers the information flow? Does the customer
           have to take the initiative?
           What is the frequency of the information flow? Does information
           flow in one batch or continuously?
           How rich is the information flow? Are you just exchanging a few
           bytes, or do you have access to high-bandwidth, multimedia
           information flow?
           How much customer effort is required? How long would it take
           for a typical customer to complete this step?
           Who is acting on the information at this step? Is it the customer
           who is primarily making the inference on how to use this
           information, or is it the firm that acts on this information? For
           instance, who is translating the customer need into a product or
           service provided by your firm? Is it primarily the customer who
           is making the inference on how to fulfill the need, or does the
           firm help in that decision?
WORKSHEET 6-3

Information flows at each stage of the customer journey




   Each question captures one of the five dimensions of the information
flow discussed in chapter 4 on the recognize, request, and respond cycle.
For now, you can leave the last row of the worksheet (improvement ideas)
blank. You will come back to this row in step 6 of this workshop.
Step 4: Identify the Deeper Needs of
the Customer
In chapter 5, we discussed the usefulness of the why-how ladder as a tool to
discover your customers’ deeper needs. Recall that each of the boxes in the
why-how ladder corresponds to a specific way of expressing a customer
need. Customer needs at the bottom of the ladder are more focused; they
address how a particular need could be fulfilled. We climb up the ladder by
asking why: Why is that need relevant in the first place? What would be
good about fulfilling this customer need? This is what gets us to the deeper,
more fundamental needs of your customer.
   Use worksheet 6-4, the why-how ladder, based on the needs of your
customers. There is no single right answer here. Answers at different rungs
of the ladder correspond to alternative value propositions that your firm can
provide to the customer. If you only focus on the how—that is, the lower
parts of the ladder—you are at risk of being only in a transactional
relationship with the customer. The moment an alternative solution becomes
available to the customer, one that is associated with a higher willingness-
to-pay or a lower price, your customer will grab it.
   On the other hand, there also is a risk of focusing too much on the why.
The more often you ask why, the fuzzier the value proposition becomes.
You move from “provide me with an appointment” to “see a cardiologist” to
“keep my heart healthy” to “have a longer and healthier life” to “be happy.”
We propose that the first steps of broadening the problem by asking why are
helpful. But be reasonable, because too many whys and you’ll find yourself
searching for world peace and eternal bliss (and chances are you will not be
able to move the needle on those objectives).
WORKSHEET 6-4

The why-how ladder
In the eyes of the customer, the purpose of the relationship with our firm is to …
Step 5: Understand the Current
Relationship with Your Customer
across Separate (Repeated)
Customer Experiences
As we discussed in chapter 5 (on the repeat dimension), there exists an
important difference between a single episode of a customer experience and
a connected relationship. In the worst case, your customer only has one
experience with your firm and you will never meet again. Not much better
is the scenario in which you provide multiple experiences to the same
customer, but every time, you treat the customer as if you have never met
before. In chapter 5, we laid out four different levels of customization that
are enabled by the repeat dimensions. Let’s work through these four levels
for your organization.
   In order to weave multiple customer experiences together into a
connected relationship, the firm has to be able to identify the customer and
retrieve information about the previous customer experiences. This is level
1 of customization. Answering the following questions will help you with
this step:

           How do you identify the customer and connect him or her to
           prior customer experiences?
           Across which domains are you able to identify the customer?
           (E.g., stores or dealers in different geographies, online activity,
           or different agents from the same customer firm.)
           Is this identification requiring time and effort from the customer?
           Is this identification costly to your firm?
           What organizational incentives are in place (or what
           disincentives need to be removed) so that various parts of your
           organization share the information they have about a particular
           customer?
   Beyond identifying the customer across multiple episodes of interaction,
you want to improve the customer experience by learning more about this
particular customer from one episode to the next. This is level 2 of
customization. Ask yourself the following questions:

           How do we improve customization for a particular customer
           based on information that we have gathered about this customer?
           What feedback do we gather from the customer to understand
           whether a particular solution worked well?
           Can the customer make direct suggestions to us for how to
           improve our product or service?
           How do we share this information inside our organization?

   As we discussed in chapter 5, learning not only happens at the level of an
individual customer but also at the level of the population of customers that
you face. Level 3 of customization relates to changing your available
products and services to create more value. Ask yourself the following
questions:

           How do we currently use population- (or market-segment-) level
           data to improve our product assortment?
           How do we currently use population- (or market-segment-) level
           data to refine features of existing products?
           How do we currently use population- (or market-segment-) level
           data to create entirely new products?

   Lastly, use the insights you gathered from step 4 in this workshop, in
which you worked on the why-how ladder, and ask how you can become a
trusted partner of your customers. This is level 4 of customization.

           At what level in the why-how ladder are most of our transactions
           currently taking place?
           What would be alternative value propositions to the customer
           that are either more focused (how) or broader (why)?
Step 6: Identify New Opportunities
to Reduce Customer Pain Points and
Lower Fulfillment Costs
Based on the work that you did in the previous steps, the goal of this and
the following step is to generate a list of opportunities to improve (a) your
current customer experiences and (b) what happens across experiences.
   Such opportunities are a combination of the following elements:

           A customer pain point, a forgone revenue opportunity, or a waste
           of firm resources
           A change along any of the five dimensions of information flow
           at any of the steps in the customer experience or from one
           experience to another

   Let us first focus on the willingness-to-pay drivers and pain points that
you identified in step 2 and the information flows that you analyzed in step
3. To generate ideas, we find it helpful to go in both directions:

           Start with the willingness-to-pay drivers and pain points you
           identified and ask, “What could we do to relieve this pain point
           or to better address this willingness-to-pay driver?” And then ask
           yourself, “What information would we need that would allow us
           to implement our solution?”
           Or start with the information that you could potentially gather,
           and then ask yourself, “What pain point could we relieve with
           this additional information? Which willingness-to-pay drivers
           would we be able to address with this information?” To identify
           valuable information, it can also be helpful to ask yourself, “For
           what data would we be happy to spend a lot of money (and
           exactly how much?) because it would help us to increase our
           customers’ willingness-to-pay or improve our efficiency?”
   To generate ideas, it is sometimes also evocative to ask, using the
different connected customer experiences we introduced in chapter 4:

           What could we do to create a better respond-to-desire customer
           experience?
           How can we build a better curated offering?
           For what aspects would our customers potentially value a coach
           behavior experience?
           Could we create an automatic execution experience for some of
           our services?

   Recall that these different customer experiences affect different stages of
the customer journey, as we illustrate in worksheet 6-5. Use this worksheet
to keep track of your ideas and the required information. It is useful to draw
arrows between the responses to pain points (or willingness-to-pay drivers)
and the boxes containing the required information.
   Once you have identified the required information for your various ideas,
you can go back to your work of step 3 and fill in the bottom row of the
corresponding worksheet: What changes do you have to make to your
information-gathering activities in order to acquire the information you
need?
   At this point, we want you to come up with as many opportunities as you
can.
   An example for an opportunity that could come out of this step would
look like this:

      Customers are often late when it comes to retirement planning. By
      tracking their spending patterns and their current assets and debts, our
      bank could engage earlier in the customer journey when the need is
      still latent, as opposed to waiting until the customer comes to us. A
      personalized video chat could be initiated by us and be used to engage
      the customer in this process by comparing her or his account with
      those of a peer group.
WORKSHEET 6-5

Responses to pain points and required information




   But it is not all about pain points and willingness-to-pay. The
information flows in a connected relationship can also improve your
efficiency, thus driving down fulfillment costs. This can happen in one of
two ways. First, the information flow might already be happening, but it is
happening manually. A dispatcher uses radio communication to organize a
passenger pickup; a Disney waiter gets a food order from a customer by
handing out a menu, coming back, and then taking the order; or a patient
goes through registration in the hospital before receiving care. As important
as this information might be, it is definitely not adding value in the eyes of
the customer and it unnecessarily drives up fulfillment costs. Specific
questions to be asked include the following:

           Where is transactional information exchanged in person, via
           phone, or via fax?
           Where do you still use manual data entry?
   Consider the following example of an opportunity that reflects the
automation of an existing information flow:

     Patients coming to the clinic spend a long time checking in and
     dealing with paperwork. By tracking the patient’s phone through
     geolocation and using facial recognition technology, check-in
     becomes effortless, which is more convenient for the patient and cost
     efficient for the clinic.

   Beyond streamlining or even automating your existing information
flows, there might be opportunities for efficiency enhancements by
connecting previously unconnected parties. We saw examples of this in our
discussion of grocery shopping and ride hailing in chapter 2. Such new
connections can help to balance workloads across resources and thereby
further reduce fulfillment costs. How might the opportunities you identified
earlier be improved further by adding new information flows between
previously unconnected parties?
   How about connecting patients with care providers just in time, as
opposed to only when the appointment was made?

     Often, patients don’t show up for their appointments, leaving the
     provider or the equipment unused. Whether a patient will show up on
     time, late, or not at all is only known at the last minute. By tracking
     the patient’s phone through geolocation and using local traffic
     information, an expected arrival time can be calculated. If the patient
     is not within five miles of the hospital thirty minutes before the
     appointment, a reminder message is sent or the appointment slot is
     released.
Step 7: Find Ways to Utilize
Information Gathered from
Repeated Interactions to Improve
the Recognize-Request-Respond
Cycle
A key concept behind the repeat dimension of a connected relationship is
that you learn from one customer experience to another. In step 5, you
analyzed what you are currently doing for each of the four levels of
customization that relate to the repeat dimension. In this step, we ask the
natural follow-up question: How can you improve on each of these stages?
   Questions you can ask yourself include the following:

          How can we improve our ability to keep track of an individual
          customer and to aggregate information across any touch point we
          have with this customer?
          How can we improve the internal incentives, or what changes to
          the organizational structure do we have to make in order for
          information sharing to happen?
          What have we learned about this customer and the customer’s
          associated needs that would allow us to play a more active role
          in offering solutions to those needs? How could we use this
          information to better customize the product or service in the
          future?
          What have we learned from serving similar customers that would
          allow us to change the kinds of products and services that we
          will include in our lineup in the future?
          What have we learned about our customers that might give us
          insights that even our suppliers do not have about what future
          features or services are valuable to our customers?
          What efficiency improvements can be identified based on
          learning from the experiences of one customer and from the
          experiences of the population as a whole?
          Resulting from these adjustments, what deeper needs of our
          customers are we able to address (coming back to the deeper
          needs that you identified in step 4)?

   On worksheet 6-6, write down a concrete example of a customer and a
sequence of experiences that this customer has with you, then identify how
you could use the information that you gather to improve customization,
optimize your product and service offerings, create new products and
services, improve efficiency, and eventually climb up the hierarchy of
needs.
   The output of this should take the form of an opportunity such as the
following:

     Many students in MBA finance courses struggle when learning to
     compute net present values or discounted cash flows. By tracking the
     ability of a student to handle such questions across multiple
     homework assignments and potentially even multiple courses, a smart
     textbook can determine whether the student does not understand the
     definition of these concepts or whether he or she is struggling with
     more foundational content such as computing compound interest
     rates. If needed, the student is shown a tutorial for compound interest
     rate calculations.
WORKSHEET 6-6

Learning from repeated customer experiences




   This opportunity might be further expanded to capture population-level
learning:

      By tracking the homework submissions for an assignment, the
      teaching team can adjust the lecture plan to spend more time on
      content on which the general student population tests poorly.
Step 8: Assess Your Data-Protection
Policies to Maintain Trust with Your
Customers
To create a sustainable competitive advantage using a connected strategy, it
is important for firms to create and maintain a trustworthy relationship with
customers. Only if you safeguard your customers’ data and use it in
transparent ways will the customers continue to allow you to move up their
hierarchy of needs. You need to make sure that you monetize your customer
data in accordance with the relevant law, in agreement with your customer,
and in a way that it is protected from criminal abuse. Some of the key
questions you need to ask yourself include:

           What procedures do we have in place to stay informed about
           data protection and privacy regulations in all the areas in which
           we are active?
           How do we keep up with how public opinion is changing with
           respect to these issues?
           How do we currently obtain customer consent? How transparent
           is it to our customers what happens to their data?
           What do we do to keep the data current and accurate?
           What do we do to keep the data safe, and under what conditions
           do we notify customers of any breaches?
     PART THREE




CREATING CONNECTED
 DELIVERY MODELS
                                      7

               Designing Connection
                   Architectures


For a successful connected strategy, a firm not only needs to create
connected customer relationships but also has to create these relationships
in a cost-effective way. To succeed, a firm needs a connected delivery
model, which consist of three elements:

         1. The connection architecture (equivalent to a series of pipes
            connecting the firm, its customers, and its suppliers)
         2. A revenue model (how the firm can benefit from what flows
            through their pipes)
         3. A technology infrastructure (how well these pipes are
            lubricated)

    In this chapter, we focus on the connection architecture—a design aspect
for which options have been proliferating.
    Here’s how the question of connecting the firm, suppliers, and customers
can play out in the realm of finances. Consider Jane, a filmmaker seeking to
create a documentary about polar bears. Today was an exciting day in Jane’s
life: she finally drafted an initial budget. To celebrate having created a
budget, and to solicit some advice on how to find financing, she went out
with her two best friends to a local bar. As usual, she wanted to split the tab
at the end of the evening, but she realized that she accidentally left her
wallet at home. Her friends paid for her, and she naturally promised to
repay them. That interaction started the group talking about money and how
they all need to save for retirement. As Jane walked home, many numbers
were swirling in her head: the $25,000 funding for her film project, the $40
she owed her friends for the drinks, and the $300,000 she realized she might
be short in retirement savings.
    As this little vignette shows, customers have a wide variety of financial
needs. Customers sometimes need to borrow money (to buy a house or
create a new venture). Customers need to manage transactions (moving
money from A to B, be it from the customer’s bank account to a friend or to
a restaurant), and customers need to save for retirement. Historically,
customers relied on their bank to help with most financial needs. A
customer opens a checking account and gets a credit card issued by the
bank; the customer talks to a loan officer to get financing for projects; and
the customer talks to a financial adviser of the bank, who recommends a
mix of mutual funds for retirement, including funds managed by the bank
itself. But the banking industry is currently going through a major
transformation created by a movement known as fintech (financial
technology).
    Different connection architectures lie at the heart of some of the most
profound disruptions.
Connected Producers
All connection architectures start with information flowing from customers
to firms. These customers might be individuals or businesses. Thus every
connection architecture works in both a business-to-consumer (B2C) setting
and a business-to-business (B2B) setting.
    Connection architectures differ in how the firm connects back to the
customer. In the most straightforward connection architecture, it is the firm
itself that produces the product or service that fulfills the customer demand.
We call this type of business a connected producer. This is summarized in
figure 7-1, which captures the key connections or pipes between
organizational entities in the value chain.

FIGURE 7-1

Connection architecture for a connected producer




   In the financial services sector, for example, traditional banks that create
connected customer relationships would be considered connected
producers. The key connection is between customers and the bank, with the
bank itself creating all the key services. Connected producers can focus on
one connected customer experience or offer multiple experiences. For
instance, a bank may try to make the loan application and approval process
as fast as possible (respond-to-desire), make suggestions to the customer
regarding how to invest based on the customer’s income and future needs
(curated offering), send the customer reminders to rebalance the portfolio
(coach behavior), and automatically transfer funds between the customer’s
savings and checking accounts to avoid overdrafts (automatic execution).
    Connected producers face competition from other connected producers.
But some competitors of big banks do not look like big banks at all.
Consider the loan process. Firms such as OnDeck and Earnest have focused
on a respond-to-desire user experience. In addition to using traditional
credit scores, they draw on over one hundred external data sources to
determine creditworthiness, including social data, public records, and
transactional data. This results in over two thousand data points per loan
application and frequently allows the companies to provide a decision
almost instantaneously, beating traditional bank application and approval
processes, which are usually lengthy. In this space, OnDeck has focused on
small business loans, while Earnest is a provider of personal loans, with a
focus on refinancing student loans.
    Notice, however, that at the thirty-thousand-foot level, they are operating
exactly as big banks. The main connection is between the customer and the
firm, in which information flows from the customer to the firm, and
products and services flow back from the firm to the customer.
    The architecture of connected producers appears old-fashioned.
However, two recent connectivity trends are helping connected producers to
innovate in how they serve their customers. First, today’s connected
producers increase the interaction frequency substantially, transforming big,
episodic transactions into many smaller customer experiences. Second, the
interaction’s overall richness, in terms of information exchange and product
customization, has intensified. For some examples of these developments,
let’s look beyond financial services.
    Connected producers of transportation now provide user experiences far
beyond selling cars. The world’s largest car-sharing service is called car2go.
It was created by a traditional producer, Daimler, and offers Daimler
vehicles exclusively. Members have access to more than fourteen thousand
vehicles in twenty-six cities in eight countries. Many of these vehicles are
small, two-passenger Smart Fortwo vehicles (Smart is owned by Daimler).
Users pick up cars wherever they are parked in a city, check them out using
a smartphone app, do not have to refuel, return the car to any approved
parking spot on the streets, and pay based on rental time.
    Daimler’s car2go is an example of a connected producer that is operating
mainly in the respond-to-desire mode. Customers send their requests to the
firm, and the firm responds immediately via an app that helps locate the
nearest car that most closely fulfills the customer’s needs. Better
connectivity made this possible: GPS devices track a car’s location; mobile
apps tell customers where the cars are and eliminate the need for face-to-
face payment. This makes using an expensive vehicle more efficient. What
sounds like a cool application of the sharing economy corresponds to our
definition of a connected producer architecture.
   Competitors such as General Motors, Volkswagen, and BMW have
followed suit and created their own car-sharing services. As we’ve noted
before, just creating connected experiences will not be enough to create a
long-term competitive advantage. Others will inevitably copy you, and the
question remains whether you are able to drive a bigger wedge between
customer willingness-to-pay and cost than your competitors. To achieve
larger scale, BMW and Daimler decided to merge their mobility platforms
in 2018 to create one car-sharing service.
   Similar to the financial services industry, the insurance industry is seeing
firms that are creating connected strategies. While there are many new
entrants into what has been dubbed insurtech (insurance technology), some
of the existing connected producers have been very innovative as well.
Consider Progressive, one of the largest American automobile insurance
companies. Buying auto insurance has historically been a very episodic
customer experience. A driver calls the insurance or goes to an agent; an
underwriter analyzes the driver’s risk profile based on age, zip code, vehicle
type, and past accidents; and the company then provides a quote for an
insurance premium. In contrast, Progressive customers can agree to use an
app or plug in a small monitoring device in their vehicle. The app or device
monitors the length and time of day of travel, as well as the driving
behavior including hard braking, fast acceleration, or aggressive lane
changes. Once the data-collection period is complete, Progressive uses the
data to deliver a tailored car insurance quote to the driver. But the customer
experience doesn’t end there. Progressive is also creating a coach behavior
experience by providing customers with feedback about their own (or their
children’s) driving behavior. This allows customers to improve their
driving, which could further lower their rates. Moreover, this allows
Progressive to climb up the hierarchy of needs of its customers: it addresses
the deeper need that drivers really have for safety and security, rather than
for having car insurance.
   Many software companies, such as Salesforce and IBM, also fall into the
category of connected producer. Their tighter connection with their clients
allows them to customize their offerings and anticipate future needs (e.g.,
with respect to cybersecurity). Likewise, Google, with its search engine,
Gmail, and Google Photos, is a connected producer. The fact that Google
does not charge for these products does not detract from its status as a
connected producer who has established its own ecosystem of services. (We
will return to the revenue model of Google and similar firms in chapter 8.)
   Finally, consider the example of Disney’s MagicBand, which we
discussed in chapter 1. The band incorporates respond-to-desire elements by
enabling easy access to hotel rooms and rides and easy payment for
merchandise and food. Through its app, Disney incorporates elements of
curated offering with suggestions, and it engages in coach behavior by
redirecting visitors to less crowded rides. Not surprisingly, other
entertainment firms are developing similar technologies. For instance,
Carnival, the largest cruise line operator in the world, has developed a
device called an Ocean Medallion that can be carried in a pocket or worn as
a pin. This medallion, just the size of a quarter, automatically opens the
door of the passenger’s stateroom (no need to tap a sensor), makes it faster
and easier to embark and disembark, and facilitates payment for items
purchased on board. Linked to an app, it can help family members find one
another on expansive ships. The app can be used to order food for delivery
wherever the passenger plans to eat. Servers know who ordered the food
because the passenger’s photograph appears on their handheld device when
they get close to the passenger’s medallion. Passengers can upload their
preferences before boarding, which enables Carnival to offer tailored
activities. Carnival and Disney are both using a connected producer
architecture. The connection is between the customer and the firm; it just
has become a very high-bandwidth connection.
Connected Retailers
Connected producers face competition not only from other connected
producers but also from firms implementing different connection
architectures. For instance, in the realm of investment advice, companies
like Wealthfront and Betterment mainly use algorithms to assemble a
customized portfolio for each investor that comprises exchange-traded
funds or low-cost mutual funds managed by others. We call these firms
connected retailers—firms whose main role is to showcase, curate, and
deliver products from suppliers to customers. Connected retailers receive
information from customers and then create a connection between suppliers
and customers. This connection runs through the connected retailer, as the
firm is actively involved in moving the product from the supplier to the
customer (figure 7-2).

FIGURE 7-2

Connection architecture for a connected retailer




   Like connected producers, connected retailers can focus on one
connected customer experience or on a range. For instance, Wealthfront and
Betterment make creating a customized investment portfolio quick and easy
by doing everything online (respond-to-desire); they provide a curated
offering by allowing customers to state various investment goals and then
customizing a portfolio that aggregates over those goals; and they have an
automatic execution experience through services like automated loss
harvesting.
    Amazon’s practice of shipping out of its own warehouses is perhaps the
most well-known example of a connected retailer. Customers interact with
the company mainly through a respond-to-desire connection. However,
Amazon has clearly increased curated offerings through “customers like
you purchased” recommendations and automated offerings, such as
subscription programs where customers periodically receive products like
toothpaste or detergent.
    Many connected retailers create customer value through a curated
offering customer experience. While the internet has given customers
access to practically every product and service available worldwide, such
choice is overwhelming and requires a lot of customer time to make good
decisions. Therefore, curation can create a lot of value. Connected retailers
offering subscriptions to curated boxes of merchandise have sprung up
across hundreds of product categories, from food to cosmetics to pet
supplies. Just a sampling of subscription services starting with the letter B is
illustrative. From Bad Ass Mom Box (jewelry and beauty products) to
BarkBox (dog toys and treats) to Busy Bee Stationery (stationery), all of
them have the same user experience and the same connection architecture.
Firms purchase items from their suppliers and assemble them as a curated
offering tailored to each customer.
    We have already mentioned curated meal subscription box retailers such
as Blue Apron and HelloFresh. Several other players have emerged in this
space as well, trying to differentiate themselves by focusing on particular
cuisines or preparation time. Competitors include Purple Carrot (vegan),
PeachDish (Southern cuisine), Sun Basket (paleo and gluten-free), Green
Chef (certified organic), and Gobble (preparation time of ten minutes using
only one pan).
    Like some connected producers who coordinate customers to utilize
resources more efficiently, several connected retailers have a similar
business model. Car-sharing services like Zipcar (now owned by the Avis
Budget Group) fall into this category. Unlike car2go, which is operated by
the firm that manufactures the shared cars, Zipcar buys or leases cars from
various manufacturers, providing broader choice. (For another example
from the mobility industry, see the sidebar.)
   Rent the Runway has a similar business model for a very different
product category: designer dresses. Because these dresses are expensive and
often worn only once, they are a great example of underutilized resources.
With Rent the Runway, women can rent dresses for four or eight days at a
price much lower than that of purchasing them. Each rental arrives in two
sizes, ensuring the dress will fit. Customers return them via UPS, and Rent
the Runway handles the dry cleaning.
   Both Rent the Runway and Zipcar are exploiting an important customer
trend. What many customers actually desire is access to a product or
service, not necessarily ownership. Especially when needs vary over time
(today I’d like to drive a convertible; yesterday, I needed a pickup truck;
and tomorrow I need a minivan) and the assets are very expensive, it has
been traditionally very difficult for a customer to match needs with
solutions (and the outcome is usually a compromise like a family sedan).
Connected retailers who rent, rather than sell, products allow customers to
achieve a better match between their needs and solutions at an affordable
price. One might refer to these cases also as instances of the sharing
economy, but from the perspective of a firm that has to build a connected
delivery model, we find it more useful to classify them as connected
retailers.
   It is interesting to note that some firms that started out being connected
retailers, such as Netflix, Amazon, and Zalando, have used their customer
data to enter into the production of movies and private-label items and have
become connected producers as well. Their direct connection to the end
customer provided these firms with deeper knowledge about customers than
any of their suppliers possessed, allowing the firms to successfully
backward integrate. In sum, to create a connected strategy, firms can
employ more than one connection architecture.




       E-SCOOTER AND BATTERY SHARING
Mobility in cities has been changed not only by ride-hailing services but
also by a range of bike and scooter rental options (both electric kick
scooters and motorized scooters). Consider Coup, an electric (motorized)
scooter rental company operating in Berlin and Paris, and owned by Robert
Bosch, a German engineering and electronics company that is one of the
world’s largest manufacturers of automobile components. Customers can
rent an e-scooter (including a helmet) using Coup’s app. The scooters are
GPS equipped, so they can be picked up and left anywhere within the city
limits. Payment is automatic and based on usage time. One common issue
with such sharing services is that scooters end up in places where they
aren’t needed, such as in front of bars on Sunday mornings. Coup has
crowdsourced the solution to this problem. It offers free riding time to
volunteers who are willing to move the inventory of bikes to desired
locations. Interestingly, the e-scooters used by Coup do not have any Bosch
parts in them. In order to move faster in this space, Bosch decided to use a
scooter produced by Gogoro, a Taiwanese manufacturer, in essence making
itself into a connected retailer like Zipcar. Gogoro, in turn, pursues a
connected producer strategy in Taiwan. It sells, rather than rents, its
scooters there with a monthly subscription fee that allows riders to change
batteries at swapping stations located throughout Taipei. Riders can find the
stations and reserve their batteries through an app. Gogoro believes
customers do not want to share their scooters, but they are willing to share
their batteries. When charging its batteries at the stations, Gogoro can take
advantage of low electricity prices at times of low electricity demand.
Connected Market Makers
While Wealthfront and Betterment are actively involved in assembling and
managing their clients’ portfolios, other firms have roles primarily in
establishing a connection directly between a customer and a supplier. For
instance, LendingTree is an online lending exchange that connects
customers with multiple lenders that compete for business, allowing the
customer to select the best supplier for his or her needs. We call these firms
connected market makers—firms that create a direct link between supplier
firms and customers but that aren’t involved in handling the product or
service. Connected market makers control the connection from the customer
to the supplier, but they do not own what flows back from suppliers to
customers. Connected market makers thus rely on existing suppliers to
fulfill the needs of customers.
   This is illustrated in figure 7-3. Note that unlike the connected retailer,
who gets directly involved in handling the product, a connected market
maker establishes the connection and potentially vets the suppliers but is
otherwise hands-off in how the supplier fulfills the need, thereby carrying
neither inventory nor financial risk. Also, the number of suppliers that can
be connected to customers can be very large, since the connected market
maker is not responsible for holding inventory or directly managing the
stream of goods and services from the suppliers to the customers.
   Wallaby Financial is another example of a connected market maker in
financial services. If a customer stores all of her credit and loyalty cards on
its platform, Wallaby’s app will recommend the optimal card for each
purchase based on the nature of the purchase and the attributes of the cards
in her mobile wallet. Thus, the company can manage the customer’s cards
to minimize fees paid while maximizing rewards and discounts. Using this
data, Wallaby recommends new credit cards for more savings. In this case,
Wallaby creates new connections between credit card issuers and
customers, earning a referral commission.
FIGURE 7-3

Connection architecture for a connected market maker




    The distinction between connected retailer and connected market maker
is subtle but important. By focusing entirely on connecting businesses and
customers (without purchasing products or capacity), connected market
makers are less capital intensive. Consider Amazon again. As a connected
retailer, it invests in warehouses and inventory. But with products that are
sold through Amazon Marketplace, the company acts as a connected market
maker by taking the customer order and redirecting it to the seller, who then
takes care of the order.
    Expedia and Priceline work similarly. They neither own airplanes nor
commit to purchasing seats on flights or rooms in hotels. They simply find
customers looking for air travel or accommodations and then connect them
to the right airline or hotel. Connected market makers exist both in the B2C
world and in the B2B world. For instance, IronPlanet is a connected market
maker for used construction, transportation, and agricultural equipment, a
market estimated to be worth around $300 billion. IronPlanet connects
industrial buyers to industrial sellers of heavy equipment. (For another
example of a connected market maker, see the sidebar.)
   So, if the market maker is entirely hands-off in the transaction, what
value does it create? Wouldn’t it be better if the customer connected with
the supplier directly? Market makers can fulfill two functions:

      They can provide curated offerings and, free from the need to make
      any investments in fulfillment, can do so on a bigger scale. For
      example, OpenTable can connect patrons looking for restaurant tables
      with pretty much any restaurant in the country, a level of choice and
      access that is impossible (or really, really inconvenient) for a
      customer to replicate.
      Market makers can ensure that the products and services on their
      platform are top quality and provided by reputable sellers. While the
      individual customer interacts with a business only once, the market
      maker does so repeatedly. The vetting can be done by the market
      maker itself, as in the case of Sweeten, a market maker that connects
      reputable contractors to customers with significant renovation
      projects, or through reputation scoring done by previous customers, as
      in the case of Angie’s List, a crowdsourced directory that has
      accumulated millions of reviews for all kinds of local businesses and
      that connects those businesses to customers.

    Given that initial entry costs for a connected market maker are relatively
low, we have seen many start-ups using this connection architecture. The
downside of low entry costs, of course, is that entry is easy for everyone. As
a result, we have seen rampant imitation, leading to ever growing costs of
attracting participants on both sides of the market. Market makers have to
provide increasingly better incentives to suppliers to convince them to join,
while at the same time customer acquisition costs are rapidly increasing.
Google and Facebook have become the de facto new “landlords.” Market
makers don’t pay the traditional rent for stores or warehouses, but they pay
Google and Facebook and others for customer leads. Thus, as some industry
observers have noted, customer acquisition costs have become the new rent.




        THE PANDORA OF THE ART WORLD
The global market for art is more than $60 billion annually, yet it is very
fragmented. Art is sold in auction houses and in thousands of art galleries
around the world. This makes the market for art in the range of $50 to
$100,000 very local and inefficient: art collectors buy what they find in
galleries in their hometown but are usually unaware of what is available in
other galleries. Artsy, a connected market maker, is changing this by
connecting galleries and auction houses to art collectors around the world.
More than eight hundred thousand pieces of art from more than two
thousand galleries representing eighty thousand artists can now be found on
Artsy. Such a huge catalog of art can be overwhelming. Artsy adds value
not only by providing a marketplace but also by creating a curated offering
customer experience. Similar to what Pandora did with music and Netflix
with movies, Artsy has created a classification system (the Art Genome
Project, inspired by Pandora’s Music Genome Project) that describes each
piece of art along more than one thousand dimensions that Artsy calls
“genes.” The dimensions include characteristics such as historical
movements (e.g., contemporary Turkish art, pop art), subject matter (e.g.,
food, shadows), visual qualities (e.g., asymmetrical, blurred), medium and
techniques (e.g., animation, collage), and materials (e.g., aluminum,
gemstones). This classification system allows potential buyers to explore
the space of available art in highly nonlinear yet related ways. For instance,
a buyer who likes Andy Warhol, whose work, however, is outside the
buyer’s budget range, could be guided to younger artists whose work shares
some dimensions with Warhol’s and might be photographs rather than
paintings.
Crowd Orchestrators
What are alternative sources of funding for a project like filming a
documentary? For a loan, one option is Prosper. Borrowers request loans
between $2,000 and $35,000, and individual investors invest as little as $25
in loans they select. Prosper handles the loan servicing on behalf of the
matched borrowers and investors.
   Whereas connected market makers create a connection between
customers and supplier firms (e.g., banks), Prosper connects customers to
individuals who serve as suppliers (of funds in this case). Not only does
Prosper rely on individuals to serve as suppliers, but Prosper was essential
in creating this funding source—a crowd of individuals—in the first place.
Prosper thus orchestrated a crowd: it created a new set of connections
among previously unconnected individuals. Consequently, we call this
connection architecture crowd orchestrator. Just as with connected market
makers, here the firm focuses on creating connections instead of producing
or handling products directly. This time, however, the connections are made
between individuals and customers, not between existing firms and
customers (figure 7-4).
   Kickstarter is another crowd orchestrator and fits the profile in figure 7-
4. It connects individuals who want to support projects or want to pre-buy
products that are still in the creation phase (like the documentary on polar
bears). Though each individual contribution might be small, Kickstarter has
collected in its first nine years over $4 billion in funds and supported over
154,000 projects, all of which happened without the involvement of a bank
or venture capitalist. Kickstarter not only funds individual projects but is
also quite often used to fund startups. Banks and other financial institutions
now face competition from individuals banding together on these platforms.
Where once banks might have counted on people financing creative projects
with personal or high-interest credit card loans, some of this market has
been taken by crowdfunding.
FIGURE 7-4

Connection architecture for a crowd orchestrator




    While both connected market makers and crowd orchestrators are similar
in that they directly connect customers to suppliers, there are key
differences between these connection architectures. A customer who
transacts via a connected market maker would quite likely have made a
similar, although possibly less optimal or convenient, transaction without
the market maker: the customer still would have made a reservation at a
restaurant (without OpenTable), booked a hotel room (without Priceline), or
a bought a plane ticket (without Expedia). These transactions would have
happened because the suppliers that connected market makers connect
already existed. In contrast, a crowd orchestrator creates new supply by
allowing individuals who otherwise would not have participated as
suppliers to enter the marketplace. By creating connections between these
individuals and customers, a crowd orchestrator is essentially creating a
new market. Without Prosper, it is very unlikely that a borrower could find
individuals who would give him twenty-five dollars each; without Airbnb,
it is very unlikely that a traveler would have found an apartment to rent for
a single night. (For other examples of crowd orchestrators, see the sidebar.)
    One particular design consideration for crowd orchestrators is how much
control to give to both customers and suppliers. Can customers choose
individual providers? Can suppliers set their own prices? Overall, the more
control a crowd orchestrator exerts, the more the customer experiences the
work performed by the crowd as one coherent virtual firm. It is not the
individual provider of the product or service that matters when using Lyft,
Uber, Instacart, or others. In fact, the customer has no way of choosing who
will fulfill the request, and it is the crowd orchestrator who sets the prices,
not the individual suppliers.
    In contrast, with less control, there is more variety in the market. You
might not value that variety when it comes to traveling from A to B—for a
short ride, a car is a car as long as it is clean and basically safe. The same is
not true for a vacation home. In such settings, variety of choice is valued by
the customer, and so imposing control (“Your doors have to be white and
you need to charge one hundred dollars per night”) would be useful neither
to the customer nor to the provider of the home.
    As with other connection architectures, we see that over time some firms
operate with more than one architecture:

      Airbnb started out as a platform where travelers could find a place to
      stay while traveling by engaging in a short-term rental agreement with
      the owner. The owner acquired the real estate with the primary
      motivation to use it for herself and only hosted Airbnb guests to
      defray costs. That makes Airbnb a crowd orchestrator. But
      increasingly, rentals listed on Airbnb are owned by commercial real
      estate companies that rent their properties 365 days a year, using
      Airbnb as a sales channel. For those customers, Airbnb is also
      becoming a connected market maker.
      The “mother of all platform models” is the auction site eBay. Again,
      when an individual sells his old lawnmower on eBay, the company is
      acting as a crowd orchestrator. But when the local hardware store uses
      eBay as a distribution channel, eBay is a connected market maker. A
      similar development can be seen at Etsy, which started out as a
      marketplace where individuals could sell handmade items and now
      also offers factory-made items.
                 NOT-FOR-PROFIT CROWD
                    ORCHESTRATORS
Connected strategies can be employed successfully not only by profit-
seeking firms but also by organizations that have other objectives. The
connection architecture of crowd orchestrator can be a powerful tool to
connect individuals in need with individuals who want to help. Consider
DonorsChoose.org. Public school funding in the United States has been
very tight for many years, creating deficits in almost everything from art
supplies to books and lab equipment. Teachers with needs in their
classroom can submit a request to DonorsChoose.org. Its staff will vet and
post the projects, including a detailed financial overview of how funds are
being spent. Individual donors, and some corporate partners, then pick
projects and contribute funds. Once a project is fully funded, the staff at
DonorsChoose.org purchases the requested items and ships them directly to
the school. In turn, each donor gets a thank-you letter from the teacher,
photos from the classroom, and a report of how the funds were spent. Since
2000, DonorsChoose.org has connected more than 3.5 million donors to
fund more than 1.25 million classroom projects, totaling more than $766
million in funds raised. Without this crowd orchestrator, it is hard to see
how these donors and teachers would have connected with each other.
   Crisis Text Line is another crowd orchestrator in the not-for-profit
sphere. Crisis Text Line connects people in personal crises to trained
volunteer crisis counselors who can work remotely anywhere with a
computer and an internet connection. All conversations on the crisis-
intervention hotline, lasting on average one hour, are conducted via text
messages, the preferred medium for many teenagers. Crisis Text Line
provides training to volunteers and has invested heavily in technology that
allows texts to be automatically reviewed for severity, so that imminent-risk
texters are responded to first. Volunteer crisis counselors are supported by
full-time paid staffers who have advanced degrees in mental health or
related fields. Since its launch in August 2013, Crisis Text Line has
exchanged more than eighty-six million texts with people in need. While it
started in the United States, it has replicated its system now in Canada and
the United Kingdom. Given its extensive data, which links crisis topics,
time, and geography (e.g., depression peaks at eight o’clock at night,
anxiety at eleven o’clock at night, self-harm at four o’clock in the morning,
and substance abuse at five o’clock in the morning), it provides access to its
anonymized and aggregated data for free to police departments, school
boards, policy makers, hospitals, families, journalists, and academics.
Again, without this crowd orchestrator, the connections between people in
need and people with good listening skills would not have been made.
Peer-to-Peer Network Creators
The other problem Jane had to solve in our little vignette was choosing to
pay the bartender for the drinks or to reimburse her friends for the money.
Even without a wallet, she could have settled accounts through her
smartphone using a service like Venmo. Once a customer has signed up
with Venmo, payments can be made by individuals with only a cellphone
number or an email address, enabling transfers regardless of an affiliation
with a bank and the existing payments infrastructure.
   Venmo is a peer-to-peer (P2P) network creator. In contrast to crowd
orchestrators, where it is clear that one individual is the supplier and the
other is the customer, with P2P network creators, individuals might change
roles frequently, as in the Venmo example. Today, we send money via
Venmo to you. Next month, the transaction might go in reverse. We are
simply part of the same payment network. Venmo, owned by PayPal, now
handles billions of dollars.
   Yet another P2P network creator in the financial services space is
TransferWise, which focuses on international money transfers. Sending
money across country borders remains an expensive undertaking.
TransferWise realized that if Mario, who lives in country A, wants to send
one hundred dollars to Madhav, who lives in country B, and Jamini, in
country B, wants to send the equivalent of one hundred dollars to Juanita, in
country A, that result can be achieved by transferring one hundred dollars
from Mario to Juanita, who both live in country A, while transferring the
equivalent of one hundred dollars in local currency from Jamini to Madhav,
who both live in country B. That results in two domestic transfers, which
are much cheaper to execute than two international transfers. By creating
new connections between the various parties, TransferWise substantially
reduces costs.
   P2P network creators are remarkable organizations, often connecting
millions of individuals. Moreover, they can present a threat to existing
businesses. Banks used to love domestic and international money transfers
because they carried hefty fees. Now, these important revenue streams are
being significantly affected because these competitors are utilizing
completely different connection architectures.
   Foreshadowing the next chapter, on revenue models, we find it helpful to
think about three different types of P2P network creators based on how they
monetize their connection architecture:

     Transaction or membership revenues: While not as expensive as
     traditional banks, TransferWise does charge a transaction fee. Venmo,
     though it does not charge a fee for transactions inside the network,
     does make interest income on the capital it circulates and charges
     customers when they use credit cards to make payments. Membership
     revenue is the source of income for dating portals such as Match.com.
     Lonely hearts pay Match.com a fee to be connected to each other,
     which sometimes results in happy couples but is always cash in the
     bank for the company.
     Fees for access to the information that is created in the network:
     Wherever there is content and traffic, there is income-generating
     potential, often from advertising. YouTube started out as a P2P
     platform for sharing videos. It now makes a fortune with
     commercials, selling access to finely calibrated audiences on the
     network (e.g., targeting specific ads to viewers of certain programs).
     LinkedIn allows people to join the network for free but sells access to
     the information to potential employers.
     Revenues from complementary products: In addition to acting as a
     connected producer of running shoes, allowing customers to upload
     and analyze their running data, Nike acts as a P2P network creator by
     supporting virtual running clubs. These free clubs create a community
     of runners who encourage each other to run more. That’s good news
     for a company selling running shoes.

   We illustrate the P2P network creator architecture in figure 7-5.
Individuals are connected to each other via the network, with most
participants serving as both senders and receivers of whatever the network
is designed to facilitate (money, information, etc.) For some network
creators, revenues are generated “within the box” of the network. For other
network creators, revenues are generated by selling access to information
that is created within the network. Finally, some network creators are able
to use the network they create to drive up the willingness-to-pay that
customers have for other products and services they offer—that is, they use
the network as a complementor.

FIGURE 7-5

Connection architecture for a P2P network creator
The Connected Strategy Matrix
In the second part of this book, you learned about creating different
connected customer experiences. We introduced four of them: respond-to-
desire, curated offering, coach behavior, and automatic execution.
   In this chapter, we introduced five different connection architectures:
connected producer, connected retailer, connected market maker, crowd
orchestrator, and peer-to-peer network creator.
   Each connection architecture can be used to create different customer
experiences. With four connected customer experiences and five connection
architectures, we can create a matrix that has the customer experiences on
one axis (the rows) and the connection architectures on the other axis (the
columns) (figure 7-6). We call the resulting matrix the connected strategy
matrix.
   The purpose of the connected strategy matrix is twofold. First, it can
serve as a framework to help you understand both your own activities and
those of your competitors. Where are your competitors operating in this
matrix? Where are new startups popping up? Because firms can create more
than one customer experience and can operate with more than one
connection architecture, they can play in multiple cells of the connected
strategy matrix. The second use of the connected strategy matrix is as an
innovation tool. By going through each cell and asking yourself, “If our
firm had a strategy in this cell, what would it look like?” you have a very
structured way to guide your innovation process. We will guide you through
this process in more detail in the workshop in chapter 10.
FIGURE 7-6

Connected strategy matrix
Beyond Platforms: The Five
Connection Architectures
Over the last few years, many executives we have talked to have expressed
concern about being disrupted, not by their competitors but instead by
companies that operate very differently from them. The verb to uberize is
making it into dictionaries, and uberization is praised for its utilization of
digital technology to dramatically increase the efficiency of an economic
system by leveraging platforms and P2P interactions. Beyond Uber and its
competitors, this idea is most commonly illustrated with the cases of eBay,
Airbnb, Zipcar, Facebook, and many other companies we discuss in this
book.
   The threat of digital disruption is real, as anybody owning a cab or
running a hotel will testify. But before getting too excited about the sharing
economy and platforms (see the sidebar in chapter 1), we find it helpful to
look at these phenomena a bit more carefully. In our view, details matter, so
while Uber, Airbnb, and others all make for great business school case
studies, we should not overlook the fact that they operate very differently
from each other.
   In this chapter, we discussed five connection architectures:

      Connected producers: You don’t have to be a radical new startup or
      create a two-sided marketplace to have a connected strategy.
      Traditional producers such as Disney, Nike, and Daimler have created
      connected strategies within parts of their businesses by changing how
      they connect to their customers and by moving from episodic
      interactions to continuous connected customer relationships.
      Connected retailers: Traditional retailers ask customers to come to
      their store and to buy what they have. Connected retailers make the
      choice process and the ordering of, payment for, and receipt of the
      product much more convenient for a customer. From Amazon for
      books, and Netflix for movies, to meal-kit providers for groceries,
      connected retailers create a much closer relationship with customers,
     which allows customization and the reduction of pain points along the
     entire customer journey.
     Connected market makers: These firms create a market by
     connecting supplier firms with customers. Examples include Expedia,
     Priceline, and Amazon Marketplace. Connected market makers are
     the bazaar operators of the twenty-first century. They neither buy nor
     sell; they just make sure the right buyer is connected to the right
     supplier. This approach sounds like the dream of every operations
     manager: it seems as if this approach requires almost no capital
     (capacity, inventory) while also being free of any operational risk.
     However, to succeed with this connection architecture, a firm needs to
     be able to attract both buyers and sellers (create a two-sided market)
     and provide them with liquidity and trust.
     Crowd orchestrators: In contrast to connected market makers, the
     firms can’t rely on existing suppliers. A key task of a crowd
     orchestrator is to mobilize individuals to serve as suppliers—for
     example, of driving services (Uber), shopping help (Instacart),
     accommodations (Airbnb), or financial resources (Kickstarter). The
     key challenge is to attract customers while the set of suppliers is still
     small. Once a critical mass is reached, though, two-sided network
     effects kick in: the more suppliers that are available, the more
     customers will come; the more customers that come, the higher the
     incentives for more suppliers to join.
     Peer-to-peer network creators: These firms form and organize
     communities of users, blurring the lines of consumers and providers.
     Again, network effects play an important role in the sustainability of
     firms with this connection architecture. If the value a customer
     derives from a network increases with the number of participants
     (e.g., as the number of posted reviews increases), then larger networks
     will tend to attract more new users, increasing network size even
     more.

  The connected strategy matrix that we introduced in this chapter helps
you think through these differences. Moreover, it allows you to integrate
your analysis of the connection architectures with the four connected
customer relationships we introduced in the second part of the book. In the
upcoming workshop in chapter 10, you will put this tool to work.
   A final thought (for now) on the growth of platforms and networks. The
connection architectures to the right side of the connected strategy matrix
are enabled through advances in technology—ride sharing just does not
work without mobile computing and geolocation. With technology further
advancing, there is no reason to believe that this growth will stop any time
soon. But that by no means implies that connected producers and connected
retailers are the dinosaurs of connected strategy. For example, our opening
vignette about Disney is one of a connected producer that focuses more on
the rows of the connected strategy matrix (new connected customer
experiences) than the columns. There is no “one size fits all” for connected
strategies.
                                     8

               Revenue Models for
               Connected Strategies


The average American spends $384 per year on dental care between out-of-
pocket expenses and insurance copays. That’s about $10,000 on dental care
over three decades, on top of the hassle of scheduling appointments, getting
to them, waiting, and the pain of the care—a pain point if there ever was
one.
   Now, imagine that you are the CEO of an oral care or medical device
company. You invent an amazing toothbrush that detects plaque and cavities
before dentists or patients do. Using the insights from this book, your
company makes it smart and connected. It guides the patient in the brushing
process and schedules a dental appointment if needed. Your toothbrush, let’s
call it the Smart Connect XL3000, keeps customers’ teeth so much cleaner
that it cuts dental care costs in half and reduces time spent in appointments.
Let’s assume it costs $300 to produce and lasts five years, as long as the
toothbrush head is replaced every six weeks. At what price would you sell
the Smart Connect XL3000?
   Before pondering your pricing proposal, be it $500 or $5,000, be it with
a 50 percent gross margin or 20 percent more than the competition, note
that the issue is about more than price. As far as our connected toothbrush,
or any connected strategy, is concerned, the big-picture task is coming up
with a revenue model.
   We define a revenue model as one or several mechanisms that will
compensate a firm by capturing some of the value that its products or
services generate. In the case of our Smart Connect XL3000, customers
benefit from healthier teeth, increased convenience from fewer
appointments, and long-term savings on out-of-pocket costs and copays. If
you sell the toothbrush for $400, almost all this value stays with the
customer. Customers might love you for that, but you will only make a
small profit that may not recover all the R&D investment you made to
create the XL3000. If you price it at $5,000, however, very few will buy,
destroying a lot of potential value.
   Consider the following alternatives to selling the toothbrush with a fixed
price:

      You could sell the toothbrush for $300 and then make your money by
      selling the replacement heads with a healthy profit margin, a model
      familiar to anyone using Gillette razors.
      You could offer a subscription model: for $10 a month, a new brush
      head is automatically shipped to the customer. In men’s facial care,
      this is the revenue model that led to the emergence of the Dollar
      Shave Club, a startup later purchased by Unilever for $1 billion.

   Both revenue models might be innovative compared to just selling at a
fixed price, but they have nothing to do with connectivity. As can be seen
by the examples of Gillette and the Dollar Shave Club, both strategies are
used by the (poorly connected) existing razor companies.
   As a firm with a connected strategy, you have a long-term relationship
with the customer, including a high-bandwidth information exchange. What
revenue models can you design that could not be replicated by a company
relying solely on episodic interactions? Consider the following options:

      You could charge the customer ten cents per minute of brushing time.
      Because of the connectivity, your firm measures this so you can use
      this information as part of your revenue model. (That creates a
      financial disincentive to brush, an issue that can be handled by
      making your guarantee contingent on certain minimal use.)
      You could launch an optional app that helps the customer in her
      brushing behavior for a one-time fee of ten dollars or a monthly
      subscription fee. Such a coach behavior connected experience might
      alert the customer when the toothbrush has not been used for twelve
      hours, or when the right-handed customer brushes too much on the
      left side of the mouth and too little on the right side, or when the
     customer exerts too much pressure (note that such apps already exist
     for Bluetooth-enabled electric toothbrushes from Oral-B, for
     instance).
     You could have a sensor at the brush head that automatically detects
     its deterioration and reorders a new head as needed, resembling the
     printer toner example from chapter 4.

   These revenue models allow you to appropriate some of the extra value
that your product creates for the customer (beyond the value that the
customer is currently getting from using normal toothbrushes). Are there
more alternatives? So far, we’ve only looked at dividing the value between
your company and the customers. But what about other parties? Let’s
continue brainstorming other forms of revenue models:

     Some dentists might not be happy about the Smart Connect XL3000,
     but others might pay you a referral fee if your toothbrush makes an
     appointment at their practices. How about insurers? You could give
     the toothbrush to the insurance companies for free and then ask to be
     paid a percentage of the savings relative to past patient expenses.
     You could also collect data about brushing behavior, including what
     time your customer gets up in the morning and when (or what) he
     eats. You could sell this data to Starbucks (which could provide coffee
     just when customers are in their wake-up routine) or to the customer’s
     life insurance company, alerting it that its customer seems to be on an
     unhealthy diet or is smoking, creating a strong incentive for the
     customer not to engage in these activities.
     Finally, through your connection to the customers’ bathrooms (not to
     mention their mouths), you could become a trusted partner in oral
     hygiene and have the Smart Connect XL3000 be the platform on
     which other oral care transactions are organized, earning referral fees
     when customers make purchases for toothpaste or dental floss.

   The breadth of these models is already spreading across various
industries, as the following real examples illustrate.
   In the medication adherence domain, PillsyCap has developed a forty-
nine-dollar pill bottle that reminds patients to take their medications or
supplements. The bottle has a simple sensor to detect when it is opened and
is connected to a cloud-based server. At AdhereTech, another startup with a
similar technology, the pill bottles are given to the patient for free.
Pharmaceutical companies and pharmacies benefit from the technology by
selling more pills, and hospitals benefit from reduced readmission. Thus, a
price of zero to the patient maximizes adoption and increases the value that
can be shared among insurers, pharmacies, drug companies, and health care
systems. But how can we be sure that the pill has been taken after the bottle
is opened? Smart pill bottles have no answer to this question. The
schizophrenia drug Abilify, a pill with an embedded sensor that tracks
whether the medication has been ingested, has solved this problem. The
pill’s sensor is connected to a wearable patch that feeds data to a mobile
application.
    Similarly, consider Fitbit. Fitbit has emerged as a powerful brand for its
wearable devices. Given millions of Fitbit users, the company has access to
remarkable data. For example, it has access to 105 billion hours of heart
rate data, six billion nights of sleep, and two hundred billion minutes of
exercise. Even though all this data is depersonalized, it is still of enormous
value. Fitbit is preparing to launch digital health tools for the detection of
atrial fibrillation, sleep apnea, and other conditions.
    The purpose of this chapter is to discuss revenue models for connected
products and services. As you likely have noticed, we are using the health
care space as a case study. Entire books have been written about revenue
models, so our focus is on the unique opportunities for connected strategies.
We do this in four steps:

        1. We first provide a brief overview of revenue models and point to
           some of the key limitations resulting from episodic interaction.
        2. We then discuss what is unique about connected relationships
           that could be used as part of a revenue model. We point to the
           increased value that is created by connected relationships; the
           higher dimensionality of the pricing mechanisms, which reflects
           more data availability; and the different timing of payments that
           result from the longer relationship.
        3. We then link these idiosyncrasies of connected relationships to
           the revenue models and propose a framework to explore
          alternative revenue models.
        4. Based on this framework, we articulate a set of guiding
           principles for choosing a revenue model and illustrate those with
           examples from other industries.

   We conclude the chapter by discussing challenges related to privacy, an
issue that is particularly relevant in revenue models in which customers pay
the firm not with money but rather with data.
Revenue Models: A Brief Overview
Consider the history of pricing in four episodes. The first episode is
haggling, still common at many bazaars. The vendor does not preannounce
a price and haggles with each potential customer.
    The second episode is posted prices, such as those printed on items in a
supermarket, listed in catalogs of mail-order companies, or displayed on
billboards. Posted prices simplify transactions, increasing convenience and
efficiency. However, they enforce uniformity across customers. If Selena is
willing to pay $500 for a phone but Jackson is only willing to pay $300,
price discrimination between the two is difficult. Similarly, if a retailer has
only one phone left in stock, it might make sense to raise the price, but this
is often impossible if the price is posted.
    With the arrival of the online marketplace, we entered a third episode. It
became feasible to adjust prices dynamically and intelligently. As
consumers, we are most familiar with, and sometimes annoyed by, airlines
doing this. A flight from Philadelphia to Boston might go from $99 one day
to over $400 the next, reflecting seat availability and the airlines’ ability to
identify us as a likely business traveler given our travel time. The internet
also facilitates more complex pricing schemes, such as customer loyalty
programs or group buying.
    Yet despite these variations, from haggling at the bazaar to dynamic
online pricing, traditional revenue models retain three limitations:

        1. Limited information: Given the episodic nature of the
           traditional (nonconnected) business transaction, there comes a
           time when buyer and seller have to agree on a price, be it for a
           toothbrush or a medication. The problem is that the value the
           buyer will derive from that transaction is still unknown at that
           time. Will the new toothbrush really reduce my need for dental
           services?
        2. Limited trust: One solution to dealing with limited information
           is to delay the final pricing decision until more information is
           available. For example, the toothbrush manufacturer could
          require the customer to pay another $500 if his teeth remain
          healthy. The problem with that solution is that in the case of a
          cavity, the customer will blame it on the toothbrush and the
          manufacturer will blame it on poor brushing behavior. Short of
          any monitoring data, the conflicting interests of buyer and
          supplier will erode trust between them.
       3. Transactional friction: Even if we could overcome the limited
          trust and find a way to determine whether the customer’s
          degradation of teeth is due to poor brushing or poor product
          performance, we still face the problem that the customer derives
          value from the toothbrush every day. Yet, traditionally, paying
          every day is a very costly practice. Every transaction requires an
          administrative overhead for payment processing, which likely
          will separate the customer’s timing of payment from the timing
          of deriving value.

   With advancements in connectivity and the resulting emergence of
connected relationships as discussed throughout this book, we have now
entered a fourth episode of pricing.
What Is New with Connected
Strategies?
In this fourth episode of pricing, the three limitations just discussed are
overcome by longer-lasting, connected relationships facilitated by high-
bandwidth information exchange. It is possible to use a whole range of
additional variables as part of the revenue model. In other words, the price
can now depend on factors that previously could not be used to influence
the pricing decision. This includes information about the following:

      When the product was used
      Where it was used
      Who used it
      What benefits were derived from using it
      What problems occurred while using it

   In short, the resulting revenue models can now be tailored to the
particular use case. As a result, the connected relationship allows the firm to
eliminate the three limitations discussed earlier in the following ways:

      The problem of limited information can be overcome by delaying
      payments until more information becomes available. The most
      common revenue model that results from this is referred to as pay-for-
      performance. Payments are delayed until more information about the
      user benefits are known.
      The problem of limited trust can be overcome as constant information
      flow allows for the monitoring of actions taken by two parties with
      conflicting interests. Such verification is also necessary for the pay-
      for-performance model.
      Because of low transaction costs, there is no reason to lump all
      financial transactions into a single payment, as is common in episodic
      relationships. Instead, we can use revenue models such as pay-per-use
      (pay every time the product is used).

    Thus, connected strategies allow us to create completely new revenue
models. For our toothbrush, we can make the price a function of how many
minutes the brush was used per day, how many different customers used the
brush (hopefully with different brush heads), or the degree to which cavities
could be avoided. In other words, the constant connection and associated
information flow allow us to increase the dimensionality of the pricing
space. No longer is there a single price printed on the box; there now exist
many different options for revenue models, including different ones for
different segments.
    The increased dimensionality is appealing at first because it provides us
with many levers that we can pull to increase profits. But, just as would be
the case for anybody going from the driver’s seat in a car to the pilot seat of
an airplane, too many levers can be overwhelming. This raises the question,
What are the general rules on how to form new revenue models, especially
those that take advantage of connectivity? The following six guiding
principles will help you answer this. Each is written as an action item and
illustrated with our toothbrush example in the sections that follow, as well
as with case studies from other industries:

         1. Think value creation first.
         2. Make pricing contingent on performance.
         3. Remember the ecosystem is broader than the supply chain.
         4. Get paid as value is created.
         5. Reinvest some of the created value into the long-term
            relationship.
         6. Be cautious when replacing cash payments with data payments
            from users.

   Let’s look at each principle in turn.
Principle 1: Think Value Creation First

Consider the payments received by ophthalmologists for performing eye
exams on patients with diabetes—a practice generally recommended
annually to prevent diabetes-related blindness. Patients don’t particularly
like these examinations because they require a time-consuming eye dilation
for a retinal photograph to be interpreted by the ophthalmologist. The
dilation can leave the patient with blurry vision for several hours. Patients
who could otherwise get back and forth to the doctor on their own often
need someone to take them home. Adherence rates for exams are low, no
doubt contributing to the high incidence of preventable blindness among
diabetics.
   A recent study showed that a commercial insurer would typically
reimburse $254 for an in-office examination involving retinal photographs
—about $26 for the photographs plus some facility fees and the
professional service. The same insurer would reimburse a total of only $16
for the photographs when the service was performed remotely, with no
payment allowed for the interpretation of the images.
   This example shows that many business relationships are destroying
value because of poorly aligned incentives. For example, in health care, the
payer is not the consumer. Insurance companies, short of information, are
concerned that patients consume too much and physicians provide too
much. In the diabetes case, insurers apparently liked the higher price, pain,
and friction of the traditional exams because they deter patients from having
them. (Whether such preference would backfire because of higher costs
down the road is a matter for debate.) Thus, they were comfortable with
high reimbursements for an office visit but would only pay a small fraction
for an equally effective remote service.
   Before we think about how to build a revenue model for any business,
we should ask ourselves what actions maximize the value in the system.
Once we know the desired actions, we can think about a revenue model that
rewards people for those actions. In the foregoing cases, we want diabetics
to get their eyes examined and everyone to brush their teeth.
   Rather than just replicating the old relationships—in the eye case, the
insurers being concerned about fraud by doctors and overuse by patients—
we should use connectivity to ensure that every actor makes value-
maximizing decisions. For example, in the construction industry,
contractors and customers are often at odds from an incentive perspective,
where contractors get paid through costs-plus pricing, including an
allocation for time worked. This incentivizes contractors to take more time
to complete a project, harming the customer both by delaying the project
and by charging a higher rate. Because customers often interact with
contractors only once, the reputational loss of such behavior for contractors
is low. This hurts both customers and the contractors who are actually doing
a good job. Now, connected market makers such as Angie’s List connect
users via crowdsourced reviews to create transparency in a contractor’s
practices. Contractors who repeatedly exploit their customers will receive
lower ratings, which translates into fewer opportunities. This aligns
contractors’ incentives more closely with the customers’ incentives because
their future business depends on their reputation.
Principle 2: Make Pricing Contingent on Performance

When deciding to buy a product, customers face uncertainty about how
good that product or service will be. Whether they are consumers or firms,
customers don’t like uncertainty, and avoiding it can kill a value-creating
transaction.
    Pay-for-performance is one way to overcome the problem. Customers
don’t pay for the product or service; they pay for (some of) the value it
creates for them. This is possible in a connected world because we have
good data about the customer.
    In the toothbrush example, connectivity allows us to observe the health
of the teeth. This enables us to give the customer a form of performance
guarantee (“If your teeth are not in good health, you will not pay a penny”)
while also aligning the customer’s incentive (“If you do not brush, our
performance guarantee no longer holds”), thereby avoiding the incentive
inefficiencies mentioned earlier.
    In general, we define pay-for-performance revenue models as revenue
models in which fixed transaction prices are replaced by payments
contingent on achieving certain objectives. The following examples help
illustrate their use in a wide array of industries:

     As we noted in chapter 1, Rolls-Royce offers jet engines and
     accessory replacement services on a fixed-cost-per-flying-hour basis
     to airlines (“power-by-the-hour”), linking revenue with performance.
     This is aided by onboard sensors to track on-wing performance.
     Power purchase agreements (PPAs) are widely used in the solar
     industry. Rather than asking customers to buy the solar panels, pay for
     installation upfront, and wait for energy savings to trickle in, PPAs
     allow customers to lock in the energy produced by the installation at a
     fixed cost per kilowatt-hour over the term of the PPA, without owning
     the equipment or paying upfront.
     Some consulting firms are moving from a billable-hour model to a
     fees-at-risk model, where a portion of the consulting fee is linked to
     their clients’ results. This is in response to corporations’ increasing
     desire for impact and outcomes over pure insights.
Principle 3: Remember the Ecosystem Is Broader Than the Supply
Chain

As a manager of a business, you often think about your supply chain. You
buy components, manufacture your product, and sell it to retailers who sell
it to consumers. Unfortunately, there are only so many degrees of freedom
in this supply chain—only so many parties you could go to for revenue. Or
are there?
    Recent research in strategic management has moved the focus from the
supply chain to the ecosystem. The ecosystem is much broader and includes
all firms or other organizational and individual entities that have some
interest in your product. To figure out which entities are in your ecosystem,
ask yourself, “Who else would derive value from our connected
toothbrush?” For this product, the list might include entities such as the
following:

      Insurance companies paying for dental care

      Dental practices that understand that the new brush means potentially
      fewer cavities and the need to be on the toothbrush’s list for referrals
      Toothpaste companies
      Parents who are concerned about their children’s brushing habits
      Consumer product companies that would love to learn about the
      habits of consumers
      Comcast, Verizon, and other carriers that are happy about almost
      anything that consumes bandwidth

   Many of these companies would benefit if the Smart Connect XL3000
succeeded. In other words, they might be willing to share with us some of
the value they get from our existence.
   There have been numerous examples in which firms provided a
connected product or service to their customers and made their revenue
from other sources besides charging the customer. Examples include the
following:
Many of the peer-to-peer network apps that we discussed in chapter 7
are free to customers. Some companies occupy two positions in the
ecosystem: they are the organizer of the peer-to-peer network and the
producer of a complementary product that is used in this network
(example: Nike running shoes).
In the world of connected security, insurance companies subsidize the
installation of advanced fire alarms. Similarly, car insurance
companies offer discounts for drivers who are willing to have their
driving monitored.
In the world of personal fitness, many gyms now get more revenue
from insurance companies than directly from the users sweating on
their treadmills.
Principle 4: Get Paid as Value Is Created

For most products or services, customers derive benefit over time. You buy
a car and drive it for years. You buy running shoes and run five hundred
miles in them. In the traditional episodic relationship, however, payment
typically happens upfront in one chunk. You could send Nike fifty cents
every time you go running, but it’s likely neither you nor Nike wants to do
that. More specifically, Nike would not trust you enough to give you a pair
of shoes upfront without a payment guarantee in place. And you might not
like the idea of sending Nike a payment every time you go running unless it
was automated.
   In a connected relationship these problems disappear, and the result is a
victory over limited trust and frictional inefficiencies in payment. When
your shoe talks to your phone and your phone connects to your bank
account, you could pay Nike ten cents per mile. This is the pay-as-you-go
model.
   The world of hardware and software has seen a big shift from huge
upfront transactions to pay-as-you-go models. Many firms no longer buy
huge servers anymore, instead paying for “infrastructure as a service” from
providers such as IBM or Amazon Web Services, paying on a per-use basis
by the hour, week, or month. The key value for customers is a reduction of
risk. Customers are never out of capacity, nor do customers have any idle
capacity. They also have no upfront equipment or maintenance costs, which
may be prohibitive for small companies that need cloud services. Another
revenue model option is “platform as a service,” which is priced per
application or per gigabyte of memory consumed per hour. Platform-as-a-
service providers include Google and Microsoft.
   Similarly, software has moved in many cases from a model of
purchasing and installing it on local machines to “software as a service,”
where customers pay based on features and use. Firms like Salesforce and
Netsuite have adopted this revenue model.
   Related to pay-as-you-go models are “freemium” models, where firms
provide a basic model for free and charge for access to premium versions of
their product. Dropbox and LinkedIn are examples. The free version attracts
customers, while the premium version (“Ran out of storage space?
Upgrade!”) is used to drive revenue. Freemium models must find the right
balance between giving away enough features for free to attract customers
(especially when customer benefits increase with network size, as with
LinkedIn) and retaining significant improvements in the premium versions
to persuade at least a fraction of the customers to upgrade. Many
newspapers and some magazines with an online presence have gone this
route as well. A certain number of articles can be read for free each month,
then customers must subscribe to access more content.
    What makes many freemium models feasible is the ability to manage
micropayments efficiently. With the advent of smartphone apps, in-app
purchases have made the micropayment model seamless. Many apps start
out as free for users, offering basic services or experiences before
prompting the user to unlock premium content by spending a small sum. In
China, for instance, Tencent introduced QQ Show, which allowed users to
design their own avatar that could be used not only in the instant messenger
of the QQ app but also for the group chat, gaming, and dating functions
within the app. The customization options included appearance, virtual
clothing, jewelry, and cosmetics. These items could also be purchased as a
gift for other members. Each item only cost a few RMB (pennies in US
currency) but created a significant revenue source for Tencent, given its
more than eight hundred million active users on QQ. (For more on Tencent,
see the sidebar.)
    One of the biggest sectors for micropayments is video game
development. Gamers buy virtual currency with real money and spend it to
upgrade their characters, buy special weapons, access hidden levels, and
speed progress in the game. While individual purchases can be small (as
little as ninety-nine cents), aggregate purchases can be staggering. It has
been estimated that the free mobile game Clash of Clans has earned more
than $3.5 billion through in-app purchases (of products that practically have
zero cost of production).
    Micropayments also allow peer-to-peer networks to create payments
across members. Da shang, or virtual tipping, is an increasingly popular
form of micropayment for Chinese netizens. For websites or social media
platforms that support this function, viewers can choose to virtually tip
content creators when they are wowed by the experience. Places that have
adopted this format include blogs, video sites, and various social media
platforms such as WeChat. The model encourages content creators to put up
quality content for free, hoping to recoup the development cost through tips.
    WECHAT: THE OPERATING SYSTEM FOR
              LIFE IN CHINA
WeChat, an app owned by the Chinese company Tencent, originally started
out as a messaging system. It has evolved into an all-encompassing app that
allows its users to have group chats, make calls, post personal news
(including text, images, or videos), read news, order food, make doctor
appointments, hail cabs, pay merchants, send money to friends, play games,
and much more. Functionality is expanded by more than 580,000 mini
programs that work similarly to separate apps but are housed within the
WeChat app. WeChat now has more than nine hundred million daily active
users spending more than an hour on the app on average. What makes
Tencent as a company different from Google, Facebook, and other players
is that most of its revenue stems from value-added services rather than from
advertising. While Google derives more than 90 percent of its revenue from
advertising, Tencent derives more than 80 percent of its revenue from
micropayments for services such as in-app purchases within online games
or fees for using the WeChat pay function.


   Whether it’s a freemium model or a micropayment method, they both
capture one idea: get paid at the same time as your product or service
creates value for your customers, because at that time, customers are often
quite happy to pay.
Principle 5: Reinvest Some of the Created Value into the Long-Term
Relationship

As we have seen, one great benefit of connected strategy is that you engage
with your customers in a long-lasting relationship. From an economic
perspective, that means the firm does not have to compete for every
transaction with each customer. This translates into lower discounts and less
spending on customer acquisition costs in sales and marketing. At the same
time, value is also generated for the customers who no longer need to
engage in costly and inconvenient searches and are provided with highly
personalized offerings.
    To create a sustainable advantage, it is important that at least some of the
value that is created is reinvested, strengthening the repeat dimension of the
connected strategy. Rather than taking the value and simply handing it back
to the customer, as is done in traditional loyalty programs, the firm should
seek to increase the level of customization it can provide. As we discussed
in chapter 5, we can use the value created by connectivity to move further
up the hierarchy of needs of our customers and establish our firm as a
trusted partner.
    At the level of a trusted partner, we are granted the authority of handling
a broader need, be it oral care (the Smart Connect XL3000), education and
career management (recall the example of Lynda.com), or wealth
management. This responsibility is coupled with ongoing compensation, as
illustrated by these examples:

      The original benefit of becoming an Amazon Prime member for a
      yearly fee was free two-day shipping on many items sold by Amazon.
      Over time, Amazon has reinvested and increased the benefits to
      include access to Prime Video (including licensed and original
      content), Prime Music, Prime Reading, photo storage, and other
      features. Each of these additional services increased customer value
      and the information that Amazon received about its customers,
      allowing it to further personalize its offerings and to increase
      customer loyalty. In 2018, Amazon Prime exceeded one hundred
      million members, counting half of all US households among them.
As a result of repeated interactions, subscription services can curate
and contextualize based on the learned customer’s preferences.
Birchbox, a monthly beauty products subscription service, invests its
created value in data and analytics to analyze what customers value
most highly in order to better serve them with future products. This
leads to lower churn rates, increasing the lifetime value of a customer
and the ability to dedicate additional spending, which creates a
positive feedback loop.
Principle 6: Be Cautious When Replacing Cash Payments with Data
Payments from Users

Several of the most successful connected strategy companies have a
seemingly odd revenue model: giving away their product. Google doesn’t
charge for searches or Gmail; Facebook and LinkedIn do not charge you to
become part of their networks; and TripAdvisor does not charge you to find
the most popular attractions in cities around the world. But obviously,
nothing is free. Users of these sites do not pay with their money; they pay
with their data.
    Somebody searching for the term spine surgery on Google is very likely
to have back pain. Spine surgery is a very profitable product line for
hospitals and private practices alike, so knowing that Joe Miller in Chicago
is looking for spine surgeries is something that health care providers are
willing to pay for. How much? With the clearing price for most Google
AdWords costing pennies per click, it is notable that those concerning
medical needs currently stand at around forty dollars per click.
    As this example shows, one key revenue stream can come from
advertisers, who can use the data to create more targeted and more effective
advertising campaigns. For instance, navigation apps such as Waze do not
make money by charging their users. Instead, they harvest user location data
to display the most relevant location-based ads within the app. This
determines what shops, restaurants, and other small businesses you see on
the map as you drive.
    Another key revenue stream can come from referral fees. For instance,
Mint offers the convenience of managing all of a customer’s personal
finances in one place. While it is free to use, Mint generates revenue based
on referrals made to consumer product companies or financial institutions
that sell financial products or credit cards. It also derives revenues from the
aggregation and distribution of user data. Although unique identifiers are
removed to preserve individual confidentiality, the pool of real-time
financial data has tremendous value in assessing consumer trends.
    The almost irresistible psychological attraction of free products, coupled
with the opacity of what data is collected and how it is used, often obscured
in long terms-and-conditions statements—“click here to accept”—has led to
a veritable gold rush of firms trying to collect as much data as possible
through whatever means available. Firms often collect data with the sole
purpose of reselling the information. It seems like the Wild West out there.
To us, this development does not appear sustainable in the long run … and
we would be very glad if that turned out to be the case. It is not hard to
imagine that rising societal concerns over privacy, coupled with
technological solutions that provide customers with much more control over
their own data, will create a higher burden of proof for the feasibility of
revenue models that are solely based on paying with data. We can imagine
that in the future, privacy settings will be moderated and negotiated by
customer-owned software that sits between the customer and the various
data-gathering apps, rather than being hidden within the various apps. At
that point, customers will have the ability to release their personal data slice
by slice if they see true value in doing so. Until this technological solution
is available, we can only caution firms that want to use the reselling of data
as their main revenue stream. To create a truly sustainable revenue model
will require firms to navigate a minefield that is constantly shifting.
    First, as we have discussed before, the goal of a connected relationship is
to become a trusted partner to the user, requiring a much higher degree of
trust than necessary in a traditional episodic interaction between customer
and firm. For this, we propose, a firm needs to help customers understand
the price they pay, even if this is not a monetary price but rather only in the
form of data. Paying through data can yield value to both parties, but it has
to be transparent to the customers what happens with the data they provide.
    Second, several technology experts recently have proposed to replace the
pay-with-data revenue model with a pay-for-data model. The argument is
that customers should not only be rewarded for their user-generated content,
such as teaching Google how to recognize the human voice and collecting
traffic data in the connected car by getting a free product or service, they
should receive a cash compensation on top of this. Though the price of data
ultimately should be shaped by market forces, the almost unlimited appetite
for data of artificial intelligence–based businesses makes the idea of paying
customers for their data at least an interesting twist to the revenue model.
For instance, it has been estimated that Facebook’s Instagram is worth some
$100 billion and that its users have uploaded twenty billion photos. The
following calculation is not meant to be scientific, but the numbers tell a
story: a $100 billion valuation for twenty billion user-generated pictures—
that equates to $5 per picture. Shouldn’t those who took these pictures get a
part of the pie? True, Instagram has done much more than just accumulate
photos. Nevertheless, more and more technology experts have raised the
question of to what extent users should be compensated for the data they
provide.
    Third, when customers pay with their wallet, jurisdictional questions—
for example, tax implications of such transactions—are fairly clear. When
customers pay with data, this becomes much more complex. Suddenly,
questions such as where the data is processed and where it is stored matter a
lot, as reflected by the 2018 implementation of the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation, which applies to all companies
processing the personal data of customers residing in the European Union,
regardless of the company’s location.
    As you are creating your connected strategy—whether selling data
becomes part of your revenue model or data collection is used purely to
extend your own relationship with your customers—you need to deal with
these issues actively. Given how quickly this field is changing, you have to
keep abreast of rapidly changing regulations and update your answers
frequently.
Six Principles for Designing Revenue
Models in a Connected Strategy
We opened this chapter by asking you about the right price for a connected
product. Our discussion in the remainder of this chapter emphasized that
creating a good revenue model is more than what is suggested by the word
pricing. Instead, designing a revenue model is based on identifying the
various players in the ecosystem, understanding their (typically conflicting)
objectives, and leveraging technology, all with the objective of maximizing
value.
   Value is maximized when the corrosive forces of limited information,
limited trust, and transactional friction are overcome, which plays to the
strengths of a connected relationship. In this chapter, we have articulated a
set of principles that will help guide you in the design of your own revenue
model:

         1. Think value creation first.
         2. Make pricing contingent on performance.
         3. Remember the ecosystem is broader than the supply chain.
         4. Get paid as value is created.
         5. Reinvest some of the created value into the long-term
            relationship.
         6. Be cautious when replacing cash payments with data payments
            from users.

   How can these principles be implemented? The workshop that follows
the next chapter will provide you with exercises to help you use these
principles to create the revenue model that’s right for your business.
                                       9

                    Technology
                 Infrastructure for
                Connected Strategies


Advances in technology are critical to connected delivery models. How
should we think about the enormous opportunities technology presents? Do
you need to be a technology expert to create a connected strategy? This
chapter aims to guide you through that maze. Rather than offering a
comprehensive catalog of technologies that inevitably will date quickly, we
provide a framework for thinking about connected technologies so that you
can design and implement your connected strategy. We discuss specific
technologies to illustrate general principles and illuminate what we hope is
a more timeless perspective.
   As in previous chapters, we choose a setting to illustrate key lessons.
Our focus here is on home automation and the connected house. In three
separate scenarios, Bill, Kayla, and Aruna are characters arriving at home in
the evening, making themselves comfortable, and preparing dinner.
   Bill is a college professor. He stops for groceries on the way home. On
arrival, he puts his four bags down in front of the locked door, fumbles for
his keys, and unlocks the door. The temperature in the house is on the cold
side—the air conditioner has been running all day because Bill forgot to
adjust it when he left that morning. Ignoring the granola crumbs on the
floor, he walks to the coffee machine and turns it on, only to remember that
he was out of coffee and forgot to put it on his grocery list. It will have to be
tea today. While boiling the water, he catches the end of an NPR story he
started listening to in the car—too bad he missed the middle part. Then he
sits down on his couch with his tea. Afterward, he gives the floor a quick
once-over with the vacuum.
    Now consider Kayla, a high school senior living at home. As Kayla
arrives, her mother opens the door and welcomes her. Mom, who came
home from work an hour ago, has created a perfectly homey ambience for
Kayla: the floor is clean, the air conditioner is set to seventy-three degrees,
and the smell of fresh coffee is in the air. Mom went grocery shopping on
her commute home, so the fridge and pantry are fully stocked, even though
Kayla and her friends depleted the snacks while watching movies the night
before. From the restocked fridge, Kayla grabs a diet soda and sits down in
front of the television to watch her favorite sitcom while waiting for Mom
to complete dinner. (Just for the record, Kayla’s dad might equally have
done the shopping, cooking and cleaning, and we pause here to salute
everyone who runs a home with children in it.)
    Finally, consider Aruna, a tech executive. As she arrives home, her front
door unlocks without her touching it, opening promptly based on a sensor in
the door recognizing her identity. She enters the house and is happy to see
that the vacuum robot, Roomba, has completed its job. The temperature is
set at a comfortable seventy-five degrees, thanks to the preprogrammed
Nest thermostat. Aruna shouts out, “Alexa, turn on the coffee machine,”
then heads over to the pantry, which is fully stocked thanks to Amazon’s
home delivery services. Aruna grabs a drink and sits down. Like Bill, she
had been listening to something in the car. In her case, it was a podcast, and
it restarts exactly where she had left off.
    We hope that at least at some point in your life you have been spoiled by
a parent, friend, or spouse, just like Kayla. We assume that you are old
enough to remember air conditioners controlled by a gray box on the wall
and that you have done the chores of managing a household, including
vacuuming and grocery shopping. And we assume you have at least heard
of the products present in Aruna’s household: iRobot’s Roomba, Amazon’s
Alexa, Google’s Nest thermostat, and the smart home security system that
detects who is at the door.
    Here is a preview of how we will use the three user experiences in the
remainder of this chapter:

      Just like other connected customer relationships, the connected home
      user experience comprises many individual pieces. Alexa, Nest, and
Roomba perform specific functions, like making coffee, regulating
the temperature, and vacuuming. Technologies to clean the floor
include automated vacuum machines (Roomba), traditional vacuum
machines, and somebody with a mop and broom. In the second
section of this chapter, we talk about how to deconstruct a connected
strategy into a set of functions that each represents a job to be done.
Once we know what functions the technology should perform, we can
think about the technical means to accomplish them. But, as we go
into the implementation, as managers we always should remember
that users derive value from what a device does, not from its
underlying technology. In the third section, we will describe the
concept of a technology stack, with the functions as the user sees
them on top of the stack and the technical details at the bottom.
Implementing a function to support a connected customer relationship
has many design options. The brewing of coffee can be triggered by
voice activation via Alexa, through an app on our phone, by sensing
our proximity to our home, or through a traditional on/off switch. We
should explore many alternatives and get inspired by solutions from
other industries. In the fourth section, we will discuss the
classification tree as a powerful tool to explore design options and
selection tables to help us choose between them.
Ten years ago, Aruna’s scenario would have sounded futuristic. At
that time, very few people could afford such whiz-bang technology
for home use; today this scenario (or at least parts of it) is widely
attainable. The change has been wrought by improvements in
technology that provide more functionality at lower cost. As we
discuss in the fifth section, advancements deep down the technology
stack bubble up and enable new connected relationships that were
previously impossible or prohibitively expensive.
Deconstruction: Breaking Down a
Connected Strategy into a Set of
Functions
Technologies do not have value per se; users derive value from the
technology performing a specific function. We can think of a function as the
purpose of the technology. The purpose of the technology answers the what
question (what does the technology do?). In our example, Kayla does not
care whether it is a smart door with face recognition and an automatic lock
that lets her in or her mother who does it. In the same way, the cleanliness
of the house is what matters, whether achieved through Roomba or a
member of the household with a broom or vacuum cleaner.
    Once we are clear about the what, we can turn our attention to the how
(how does the technology work?). Functions are performed by devices,
pieces of software, or people following a workflow. Sometimes the
functions are performed by the customer themselves, as was the case when
Bill did his own grocery shopping and virtually everything else in his
scenario.
    The first thing you should do when exposed to a set of technology
buzzwords in the context of connected technology is to forget about the how
and focus on the what. In any connected relationship, there are many whats,
so we need to focus on something more specific. We focus by
deconstructing the connected strategy into a set of required subfunctions.
Deconstructing a problem means breaking it up into smaller, manageable
subproblems and solving those first.
    We find it helpful to deconstruct a connected strategy based on two
dimensions. The first dimension captures all the functions that need to be
carried out within the two building blocks of a connected strategy: the
connected customer relationship and the connected delivery model. In this
first dimension, as we saw in chapters 4 and 5, the connected customer
relationship consists of four pieces:

     Recognize concerns becoming aware of the need in the first place.
     Request includes the search and decision-making process, the
     placement of the order, and the processing of the payment.
     Respond captures those functions required so that the customer can
     receive the product or service, experience it, and be connected to any
     form of after-sales support.
     Repeat encapsulates all the functions that allow the firm to learn
     continually from the repeated interactions it has with its customers.

  Within the connected delivery model, as described in chapters 7 and 8,
we need the following:

     The functions required to establish and support the connection
     architecture, which means the connections among the firm and its
     suppliers and ecosystem. For example, this could be a link to a
     supplier for a connected retailer or a reputation scoring of an
     individual within a peer-to-peer network.
     The functions required to establish and support the chosen revenue
     model. This could include measuring use time, assessing the
     performance of the product, or transmitting data to other ecosystem
     members.

   The second dimension of deconstruction takes each function, such as
identifying a person, making a payment, or shipping a good, and breaks it
up further into four types of subfunctions: sensing, transmitting,
analyzing, and reacting.
   Why those four? To illustrate, let’s return to our connected home
scenario, this time focusing on the thermostat. To avoid excessive air
conditioning, which is both uncomfortable and wasteful, four functions
need to be completed. The current temperature needs to be sensed, it needs
to be transmitted from the sensor to a decision-making unit, that unit
analyzes the information and makes a decision, and then somebody or some
device needs to react by executing the decision. This creates a feedback
loop common to all connected technologies: sense-transmit-analyze-react,
with the acronym STAR.
   We can now combine the two dimensions into a table, as is shown in
table 9-1. The columns capture the different elements of the connected
strategy: recognize, request, respond, and repeat, plus the connection
architecture and revenue model. The rows capture the four dimensions of
STAR: sense, transmit, analyze, and react. We can use the table to catalog
the many subfunctions needed to create a connected strategy, as table 9-1
shows for Aruna’s coffee consumption.
   Consider the first column, recognize. One subtask is to sense that Aruna
has only twenty grams of coffee left. This quantity information then has to
be transmitted to a cloud or edge computer (a computing device sitting
close to the information source). There it must be analyzed to answer the
question whether the amount left is less than the desired minimum quantity
of fifty grams. Lastly, the system must react and start the request module
(next column) to reorder the coffee.
   Or consider the last column, revenue model. Assume the coffeemaker
didn’t charge Aruna up front for the machine but charges her a daily fee that
includes a guarantee that the machine will have an uptime of 100 percent.
To implement this revenue model, it is imperative to sense the maintenance
needs of the coffeemaker on a continuous basis. This status information
must be transmitted to the coffee machine’s service provider. This
information is then analyzed and a decision made about when to replace the
machine. And lastly, the firm must react and ship a replacement machine
once the old one shows signs of wear.
   As we have shown in table 9-1, each function of a connected strategy
can be broken down into further subfunctions using the STAR approach. At
the end of this deconstruction, you have a set of very specific subfunctions.
Each subfunction, in turn, corresponds to an engineering problem. In other
words, you have a job to be done and now can look at available
technologies to perform it effectively. (For another example of the STAR
approach, see the sidebar.)
Functions Are Performed by a
Technology Stack
Returning to Aruna’s connected home, let’s look at what needs to be in
place for the door to open conveniently on her arrival. We need a camera at
her door, transmission technology to send the video stream, and a
computing device that takes the incoming data and sends a signal to a
locking mechanism that opens the door or keeps it shut. We can identify
people by capturing their biometrics (facial images, fingerprints, eye scans),
by having them enter a user ID and password, or by sensing the proximity
of a device such as a key or a phone. If we drill down on face recognition,
options include 2-D and 3-D image processing. Within 3-D image
processing, we can further distinguish methods of face recognition that rely
on unsupervised deep learning methodologies using neural networks and
other methods that work based on the predefined geometric patterns of
faces.
   Chances are that you are not that interested in the nuts and bolts of
unsupervised deep learning methodologies using neural networks. You just
want Aruna’s door to open when she arrives but remain closed to everyone
else. To delineate the underlying technologies, their functioning, and the
business services they perform, it is helpful to think of technologies in the
form of a stack consisting of hierarchical layers.
      APPLYING THE STAR APPROACH TO A
            SCHIZOPHRENIA DRUG
As briefly noted in chapter 8, in 2017 the FDA approved the first drug to be
paired with a digital ingestion-tracking system aimed at improving patient
adherence with taking medications. Medication adherence is a major
challenge for some schizophrenia patients, as well as for those suffering
from other conditions. The system senses when the pill is swallowed and
then transmits the data. The drug Abilify is part of a drug-device
combination branded as Abilify MyCite.
   Consider the recognize dimension that is involved in the connected
strategy of Abilify MyCite using the STAR approach discussed in this
chapter:
           Sense: Embedded in each pill is a sensor (known as an
           ingestible event marker), which is the size of a grain of sand.
           The sensor reacts when it reaches fluids in the digestive system.
           Transmit: The ingestible event marker transmits a signal to a
           patch worn by the patient, which in turn is transmitted to the
           patient’s phone, and from there to a cloud-based server.
           Analyze: The company’s software compares the events
           associated with medication intake to a medication regimen
           established by the care team.
           React: In case of a significant discrepancy, the next step of the
           connected strategy—request—is triggered, alerting the patient,
           family, or care team to take corrective action.


    The most technical layers are at the bottom of the stack. For instance, the
lowest level might be about the physical transmission of bits from one
device to another. At this layer, you are talking about volts or frequency and
worry about signal strength or network topology. The next layer up in the
stack takes these capabilities as given. You know that bits somehow will get
from one device to the other, so you can turn your attention to creating
connections, which might involve establishing and ending connections
between two devices through a protocol. The next layer might be concerned
with sending data packages through a network using sender and receiver
addresses, and so on. At the top of the stack is the application layer, which
is closest to the end user.
    The beauty of any stack model is that the user can ignore the lower
layers in the stack, just as you can drive a car without knowing how a
combustion engine works. Stacks create clear interfaces and layers of
abstraction. As somebody building connected strategies, you can decide for
yourself how deep down into the stack you want or need to go.
    The collaboration between Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak illustrates how
much you need to know about the lower layers of the technology stack (and
how far you can advance in your career by excelling at the top layers). In
the early days of Apple, Jobs was the visionary imagining user experiences.
He was primarily concerned about the higher layers in the stack, while
Wozniak was the engineer who made it happen, which required him to dive
into all the technical details lower in the stack. The focus on the user
experience and the willingness to abstract from engineering details at lower
levels stayed with Jobs throughout his career, including through the
development of iconic products such as the iPod, the iPhone, and the iPad.
Don’t get us wrong: to make a connected strategy happen, somebody has to
go deep down into the technology stack, but that somebody might not have
to be you.
Functions Can Be Carried Out by
Alternative Technologies
As you go down the stack, moving from user experience into technical
details, you have design options. There almost always exists a set of
alternatives to implement a function. Because this is not an engineering
book, our focus is on the application level of the stack (“How can we
recognize a person?”), though the logic applies to any level (“How can I
transfer ten megabits per second over a distance of five meters?”).
   Let’s look at a subfunction from table 9-1 and think about alternatives
for implementing this function. Again, let’s pick the subfunction “identify a
person” and systematically explore our design options. A great tool to
advance that exploration is the classification tree in figure 9-1.
   A classification tree takes the space of all possible solutions and breaks
them up into different categories. When it comes to recognizing a person,
we can, at the highest level, distinguish between human solutions (a
doorman or Kayla’s mother) and automated solutions. Automated solutions
can be further broken up into those that require user action and those that
don’t. And so on …
   The classification tree helps you be systematic in your exploration of
technological options and your discussions with engineers.
   To populate the classification tree, we find it helpful not only to generate
alternatives internally but also to look at how a subfunction is performed by
other firms, especially firms outside your own industry. Consider the
following example: While writing this book, one of our friends had a BMW
that required maintenance. When the maintenance was completed, she was
called by the BMW dealership and notified that the car was ready for
pickup. She took a cab to the dealership, checked in, and was informed that
the car was indeed ready and an employee would retrieve it from the off-site
parking lot. Fifteen minutes later, the car arrived.
FIGURE 9-1

Classification tree for the subfunction “identify a person”




   What other alternatives exist to implement the subfunction we could call
“product handoff”? Let’s look beyond car dealerships and contrast BMW’s
implementation with how Wawa, a convenience store chain in the mid-
Atlantic region known for great made-to-order food, performs basically the
same subfunction. At Wawa, you can order a sandwich through an app and
then pick it up at the store (a respond-to-desire customer relationship, as we
discussed in chapter 4). Since you want your meal to be fresh when you
pick it up, Wawa uses geo-fencing with the customer’s phone to sense
proximity and have the food ready on arrival. Preparing it just in time
creates a magical user experience. With this kind of service, a regional
convenience store selling $5 sandwiches outperforms a global automaker
selling $50,000 cars.
   To further emphasize the power of this approach, recall our Disney
example from the beginning of the book. Disney did not create the
connected bracelet. Instead, Disney found this technology in hospital
settings. The lesson is that, in almost all cases, companies already exist that
have done a great job implementing a particular subfunction. Your job is to
learn from the best, not to reinvent the wheel. This simple yet powerful
observation also gets us back to Steve Jobs. He did not invent the graphical
user interface when he and Wozniak launched the Mac. This function was
created by Xerox PARC, which is where Jobs first saw it and, quickly
scaling his mental classification tree, realized what could be done with it.
    The output of the classification tree is a list of design alternatives. This
list can be summarized in a selection table, as is shown in table 9-2. The
selection table takes the design options as its rows and compares them along
a set of dimensions—in our case, performance, cost, existing applications,
and other comments. For illustration, we further divided performance into
the subdimensions of user convenience and safety or reliability. Each option
is then rated relative to the other options along each dimension.
Bottom-Up Innovation by Moving up
the Stack
It is interesting to see how a stack changes over time. Consider Amazon’s
Alexa, which was helping Aruna prepare coffee. At the top of the stack, the
level of the user experience, sits a function we could label voice
recognition. Voice recognition is what voice recognition software does, but
how it does this is a matter for the lower levels of the stack.
    Looking only at the stack’s top layer, one might say, “Voice recognition
has been around forever,” a valid statement since companies like Bell Labs
and IBM experimented with it over a half century ago. For example, at the
1962 World’s Fair in Seattle, IBM revealed a device called the IBM
Shoebox, a computer the size of (you guessed it) a shoebox that had a
revolutionary capability. The device had ten small lamps and a microphone.
If somebody said “seven,” then lamp number 7 would light up. If somebody
said “four,” lamp number 4 would light up, and so on. Engineers envisioned
that we could soon dial a telephone number through voice commands.
    Voice recognition was further improved with advances in computing
technology. In the 1980s, a new approach to voice recognition emerged
using a method known as hidden Markov chains. This technology would
not simply listen to the sound and then try to match the sound with a word
from a library, it would also factor in the probability of the word occurring
by analyzing the words preceding it. If the previous word was grand, it is
more likely that the following word will be son rather than sun.
    The first mass-market application of voice recognition came with the
software Dragon Dictate, a product initially retailing for some $9,000 and
requiring substantial training to acclimate to the voice of a user. Dragon’s
software improved throughout the 1990s to require less training and sold at
lower costs.
    As computers gained increased processing power, voice recognition was
built into more applications. You might be surprised to learn that both
Microsoft Windows and Apple’s Mac OS had voice recognition built in by
the early 2000s. If you had a computer back then, most likely you did not
use that feature because it was practically useless—unreliable and slower
than just moving your mouse. So, voice recognition remained a niche
market, constrained by its limited accuracy.
   The breakthrough came in 2010 when Google added voice search to
Android phones and Siri appeared as an iOS app the same year. Enabled by
the internet, Google and Apple captured the voices of millions of users who
performed billions of queries, every one of them adding to their library of
spoken words, making voice recognition what it is today.
   The story of voice recognition demonstrates how improved functionality,
greater accuracy, less training, and lower cost are a result of new
technologies happening deep down in the stack. Hidden Markov chains,
more processing power, and the internet—none of these technological
advances was related to voice recognition. But as new technologies become
available that impact layers deep down in the stack, they improve the
execution of a function at the technical level. This improvement then
bubbles up through the layers of the stack, enabling better functionality at
lower costs in the application layer at the top of the stack. An example is the
recent success of electric cars. Enabled by better battery technology deep
down in the stack, electric cars now have become competitive with
combustion engines. The driving does not change, but the user gets faster
acceleration and a lower carbon footprint because of the advances in
technology.
   Technologies bubbling up in the stack and enabling new functionality at
the application layer have an important consequence for the design and
origin of your connected strategy. So far, we have described a top-down
process: you create a vision for a connected strategy, you deconstruct it into
subfunctions, and you look for technical solutions for each subfunction. A
complementary way to create new connected strategies is from the bottom
up. You spot a new technology and ask yourself, “Which application will be
significantly improved if I introduce this technology to the stack?” In these
innovation efforts, we start with the how, look for substantial advances in
performance or cost reductions, and then ask the modified what question:
“What new user experiences are enabled by this technological advance?”
For two business-to-business examples, see the two sidebars on digital
twins and drone delivery.
                         DIGITAL TWINS
The idea behind a digital twin is deceptively simple: create a digital replica
of a physical system, be that an airplane engine, a wind turbine, or a piece
of critical equipment on an oil rig. Digital twins can be used in product
development (e.g., exploring the best shape for a wind turbine blade),
product manufacturing (e.g., simulating different manufacturing processes
to build the blades), and product operations (e.g., assessing whether the
performance of the turbine is degrading prematurely). Digital twins are an
important tool for product-lifetime management, creating a so-called digital
thread for the product. The idea of digital twins is not new, but vast
improvements in sensors, the power of edge computing, data transmission,
and data analysis via artificial intelligence have allowed digital twins to
become a truly valuable and cost-effective tool. This is an interesting
example of technologies bubbling up in the stack in order to make higher-
level connected strategies possible.
    For instance, German machine tool manufacturer Heller used underlying
data-capture technology and Internet of Things software by Siemens to
develop a system that allows its customers to receive information about the
performance of their tools in real time and simulate different maintenance
strategies. This information allows Heller to provide preventative
maintenance or, if there is an unexpected machine overload, to intervene
immediately, reducing machine downtime for its customers. Moreover, the
availability of this information has allowed Heller to innovate with respect
to its revenue model. For customers who previously could not afford the
purchase of a machine tool, Heller now offers a new machine usage model:
it provides its machines to its customers, ensures 24/7 uptime, and charges
for the time the machine is running.




                       DRONE DELIVERY
As managers, in addition to monitoring how other companies perform
specific subfunctions in our classification tree (recall our discussion of
BMW vs. Wawa), our job is to monitor the environment and look for
promising new technologies that have the potential to bubble up through the
stack. Unmanned aerial vehicles have a long history in military settings,
including both world wars. As the technology advanced, performance
improved dramatically. These devices, now called drones, were made in
much smaller versions for espionage and in much larger versions for
launching missiles, such as the Hellfire air-to-ground missile. With further
advances in technology, drones soon became even smaller, more reliable,
and cheaper. In 2018, the German company Volocopter announced an
agreement with the government of Dubai to launch a taxi service relying on
autonomous flying cars in the form of a multirotor aircraft. At roughly the
same time, internet giant Amazon filed a string of patents for delivery
drones, indicating that drones have emerged as a potential substitute for
UPS and FedEx trucks. This is especially true in areas where traditional
delivery trucks are hard to operate, as illustrated by the startup Zipline,
which is experimenting with drone delivery for replenishing medication to
hospitals in rural Africa. As managers, we need to be continuously on the
lookout for technologies from many arenas, as Jobs did with Xerox PARC.
Innovative Business Models Don’t
Necessarily Require New
Technologies
The key lesson of this chapter is that you can create innovative connected
strategies without being a technology expert. You start with the business
vision and then work from there, including deconstructing the customer
journey into a set of subfunctions and then broadly exploring alternatives
for each of them using classification trees. Alternatively, you may notice
that technological advances have occurred that enable you to solve
subfunctions in a better or more cost-effective way, allowing you to create
new connected strategies.
    In the process of populating the classification trees, you want to look for
best practices for a particular subfunction both inside and outside your
industry. Just cherry-pick what works well: pick a “sensing person arrival”
subfunction from the hotel industry; pick “3-D face recognition” from a
phone security system; and pick “execute payment” from a peer-to-peer
payment platform. Then combine those pieces as you envision your own
connected strategy.
    You might view this approach of primarily relying on existing
technological solutions as lacking in vision—where’s the originality? It
seems somewhat risk averse, shying away from technological
breakthroughs. We propose that this approach is a strength, not a weakness.
First, the originality is often in the use of the technology, not the technology
itself. Ride-hailing companies did not develop GPS, cell phones, or Google
Maps, but using these technologies allowed them to create a new connected
strategy. Second, technology is improving so quickly that new solutions
arise all the time. Thus, the best implementation of a particular subfunction
is always a moving target. And third, relying on existing technologies can
reduce risk. The history books on technology are full of failures. Many of
them were costly, especially in those cases in which firms tried to deliver
too much too soon.
   Also, notice that our framework allows for more visionary thinking than
might appear to be the case initially. When Amazon announced its potential
usage of drones around 2016, the business world was in awe. As we show
in the sidebar, delivery of consumer packages by drone might indeed be a
novel way to implement the subfunction “rapid delivery.” It might seem
original; however, the military has long relied on drone technology, and
drones have been used to deliver medication replenishment in rural Africa.
A novel solution can come from the application of existing technologies in
new settings. It does not always require fundamentally new technologies.
   Finally, if you desire a visionary connected relationship that relies on
yet-to-be-invented technology, we advise you to check out your local
library’s science fiction section. Sound crazy? Consider a detail in the
history of the MagicBand we have not shared so far. We mentioned that
Disney executives were inspired by hospitals where dementia patients were
tracked using bracelets. But from where did the hospital executives get the
idea?
   The story of tracking people goes back to an old Spiderman comic strip
from the 1960s in which Spiderman is forced by his evil enemy, Kingpin, to
wear what is described as an “oversized ID bracelet in the form of an
electronic radar device.” In 1983, Judge Jack Love of Albuquerque, New
Mexico, initiated the first judicially sanctioned use of monitoring devices.
Inspired by the comic strip, Love envisioned defendants under house arrest
or on parole wearing an ankle monitor that would signal its location. The
world of science fiction has a long and remarkable track record of
envisioning new functions before even the first technical applications exist.
So keep on reading those comics and don’t miss the next James Bond
movie.
                                     10

                          Workshop 3
                Building Your Connected
                     Delivery Model


In this workshop, you will apply the frameworks we introduced in the last
three chapters to help you build your own connected delivery model.
Following the flow of the last chapters, you will do this in three parts. In
part I, you will map your connection architecture and the connected
customer experiences you create and compare them to your competitors’ by
using the connected strategy matrix. Part II will help you think about your
revenue model, i.e., how you capture some of the value that you create.
Finally, in part III you will catalog the key technologies that are part of your
technology infrastructure.
   Once you have captured the status quo, each of the three parts will
challenge you to rethink what you are currently doing and help you take
advantage of a connected strategy:

           Part I: Building Your Connection Architecture
                   Step 1: Use the connected strategy matrix to map your
                   own activities and the activities of your competitors.
                   Step 2: Use the empty cells in the connected strategy
                   matrix to create new ideas for connected strategies.
           Part II: Creating Your Revenue Model
       Step 3: Understand your existing revenue model,
       identify its main limitations, and consider alternatives for
       your current activities, as well as for the ideas created in
       the previous step.
Part III: Choosing Your Technology Infrastructure
       Step 4: Deconstruct your connected strategy into
       technological subfunctions and then catalog currently
       used technological solutions for each subfunction.
       Step 5: Identify new technological solutions and how
       those might enable further innovations in your connected
       strategy not identified so far.
Part I: Building Your Connection
Architecture
Step 1: Use the Connected Strategy Matrix to Map Your Own Activities
and the Activities of Your Competitors

In this step, we want you to use the connected strategy matrix to capture the
status quo in your industry. You will do this by comparing your connection
architectures and the connected customer experiences they create with what
your competitors do, including longtime competitors as well as recent
entrants to your industry. In the next step, you will use the connected
strategy matrix as an innovation tool.
   For this first step, start by making a list of your competitors, old and new
alike. Next, turn to the matrix in worksheet 10-1 and use it to position your
own activities, as well as those by your competitors. What customer
experiences are you and your competitors creating? What connection
architectures are used for that?

WORKSHEET 10-1

The connected strategy matrix: Inventory of your and your
competitors’ actions




  It is often particularly insightful to understand where new entrants are
emerging. By mapping them onto the connected strategy matrix, you can
see what kind of strategy they are using and how they differ from existing
competitors. This might help you spot where you are vulnerable for
disruptions.
   Your first task in this workshop is to fill out worksheet 10-1. Remember,
a firm can be in more than one of the cells in the matrix. Many firms try to
create more than one connected customer experience. Likewise, while most
firms operate only in one column, some firms (e.g., Netflix, Amazon, Nike)
operate with multiple connection architectures, as we saw in chapter 7.
Step 2: Use the Empty Cells in the Connected Strategy Matrix to
Create New Ideas for Connected Strategies

Giving managers a blank sheet of paper and imploring them to innovate is
often a frustrating experience for everyone involved. Where do you even
start? We find that the connected strategy matrix can serve as a helpful tool
to guide your innovation process.
   For each cell of the connected strategy matrix, especially for those cells
in which you are currently not active, ask yourself the following questions:

           What would it mean if we tried to operate in this cell?
           What kind of service or product would we offer to our
           customers?
           Which of the necessary activities would we engage in ourselves,
           and which would we provide through other players in the
           industry?
           What kind of connections to other players would we have to
           create to pull this off?

   This exercise forces you to stretch your thinking (and your existing
business model), particularly for those cells that lie outside your existing
column—that is, your current connection architecture.
   A second starting point for idea generation is to ask which inefficiencies
could be reduced or what better services could be created if you could
connect (currently unconnected) entity A with entity B. As we saw with the
examples of grocery retailing and ride hailing in chapter 2 and then again in
our discussion of connection architectures in chapter 7, efficiency can be
improved by forming new connections. So, as you consider the different
connection architectures, ask yourself the following questions:

           What are the most expensive resources in creating our product or
           service now?
           Where do we waste costs or capacity now, and how might this be
           reduced if we connected entity A with entity B?
           How could a connection architecture be used to share or reduce
           the risks associated with fluctuating demand or other forms of
           volatility?

   For instance, in the hospitality business, the most valuable resource for a
connected producer is a hotel room. Capacity gets wasted when a room is
idle, either because it was not booked in the first place or because of a last-
minute cancellation. By connecting empty rooms with potential guests—as
(connected market maker) Expedia or (crowd orchestrator) Airbnb does—
new reservations are made and empty hotel rooms are reduced. In addition,
peer-to-peer networks and crowd orchestrators can help provide additional
capacity when demand is high.
   As you are considering new connection architectures or connected
customer experiences, be it to increase the willingness-to-pay or to improve
efficiency, you need to answer the following questions:

           What information flow will have to happen between these
           players? (This foreshadows the technological infrastructure that
           you might need to put into place, which you will analyze in more
           depth later in this workshop.)
           What incentives are you going to provide to the various players
           to be connected by you? (This foreshadows the revenue model
           that you will have to adopt, the subject of the next part of this
           workshop.)

   Use worksheet 10-2 to keep track of your work.
Part II: Creating Your Revenue
Model
Step 3: Understand Your Existing Revenue Model, Identify Its Main
Limitations, and Consider Alternatives for Your Current Activities, as
well as for the Ideas Created in the Previous Step

How do you make money? First, think about all the financial flows that you
have with your customers. The following questions might help with this:

          What does the customer pay for?
          What are your different revenue streams? (e.g., initial sales,
          service)?
          Who is paying (e.g., the user, a third party)?
          When does payment occur? (At time of purchase? At time of
          use? Once or over time as in a subscription model?)

   Next, look for inefficiencies in your revenue model. Do you use this
revenue model because you believe it is the right one, or are you
constrained by connectivity to the customer? Recall from our discussion in
chapter 8 that there are three typical inefficiencies:

          Limited information flow
          Limited trust
          Transactional friction
WORKSHEET 10-2

The connected strategy matrix: Imagine your company in each cell




   Now that you understand the current revenue model, consider ways to
overcome these inefficiencies. For example, in chapter 8, we discussed the
following improvements:

            Reduce inefficiencies due to a prior lack of monitoring ability.
            Make pricing contingent on performance.
            Get paid as value is created for the customer.

   Moreover, ask yourself who, besides the customer, benefits from your
product and who in the ecosystem would benefit from the data that you are
collecting. Through the right choice of revenue model, you might be able to
benefit from value that is being created in the entire ecosystem, not just
from your customer.
   Finally, turn to the new ideas you created in the previous steps and look
for revenue models for them as well. What new revenue model would you
implement if you were able to create new connected customer experiences
(e.g., coach behavior or automated execution)? In other words, what new
revenue models would be possible or required if you decided to move to
new rows in the connected strategy matrix given your existing connection
architecture?
   In the same manner, you also need to think about how changing your
connection architecture would influence your revenue model.
Part III: Choosing Your Technology
Infrastructure
Step 4: Deconstruct Your Connected Strategy into Technological
Subfunctions and Then Catalog Currently Used Technological
Solutions for Each Subfunction

By this point, you have hopefully created a list of possible ideas for
connected strategies for your organization. Refer back to the ideas you
came up with in the workshop in chapter 6 and the ideas you came up with
in parts I and II in this workshop.
   Next, we want you to deconstruct your connected strategy ideas by
identifying the necessary technological functions that need to be carried out.
As we discussed in chapter 9, this is best done along the steps of the
customer journey and the additional dimensions of connected architecture
and revenue model. Each of those then can be further deconstructed into
subfunctions using the STAR approach, asking for each function what is
needed along the dimensions of sensing, transmitting, analyzing, and
reacting. Keep track of your analysis on worksheet 10-3.
   Each cell in worksheet 10-3 corresponds to a “job to be done.” List what
possible technological solutions exist to complete each of these jobs in
worksheet 10-4. Note that the same technology might solve several
subfunctions. This step should not only involve an internal search of
technology options that you get from your own technology experts, but also
your observations of how other firms are solving this particular subfunction.
As a starting point, here are some technologies, grouped using the STAR
typology:
SENSING TECHNOLOGIES

In this category fit all technologies that directly measure aspects of the
world that hold clues about the needs or desires of customers or that help
users express their needs. This category includes all types of sensors,
whether they are embedded in devices or in roads or are wearable or
ingestible. This category also includes technologies such as gesture and
voice interfaces, and conversational platforms that make it easier for
customers to express their needs (and that ask for clarification if the need is
not completely understood). Likewise, augmented and virtual reality
technologies enable customers to express and understand their needs and
desires—for instance, by showing customers different options in a very life-
like setting.

WORKSHEET 10-3

Deconstruct your connected strategy into subfunctions




TRANSMITTING TECHNOLOGIES

The ubiquity of high-speed internet in homes and offices and of
smartphones in the pockets of individuals has facilitated the transmission of
data tremendously. New developments such as network slicing with 5G,
Bluetooth Low Energy, LiFi (wireless communication using light), and
LoRa (wireless data communication over ranges up to ten kilometers with
low power consumption) promise big efficiency improvements in the
future. We would also put blockchain technology in this category.
Blockchains guarantee the veracity of the data that is being transmitted,
adding an important level of trust to transactions that are carried out over
networks.
ANALYZING TECHNOLOGIES

The rapid decrease in costs of computing, data    storage, and transmission
have made cloud-based solutions feasible           and accessible to all
organizations, regardless of their size. Every    firm now has access to
computing infrastructure that provides vast       storage and tremendous
computing power. Partly driven by these technical advances, remarkable
progress has been made with respect to analyzing data via machine-learning
and deep-learning algorithms. Future improvements in processing power
using quantum computing will speed up this development even more.
REACTING TECHNOLOGIES

A whole range of technological advances are continuously pushing down
the costs of reacting to customer requests. For instance, improvements in
artificial intelligence are allowing automated responses at a vast scale that
are becoming more and more personalized. Augmented reality can also be a
very effective way of responding to a request by providing the user with
rich information. Improvements in 3-D printing and advanced robotics
decrease the cost of production at a low scale, and advances in autonomous
vehicles and drones are reducing the costs of moving products to customers.



If you get stuck in a particular cell, it can be very helpful to use a
classification tree to brainstorm and broaden the set of possible
technological solutions for a particular subfunction. Recall from the
description in chapter 9 that a classification tree starts with the “job to be
done” on the left side and progressively refines the solution space.
    After you have filled out worksheet 10-4, you need to decide which
particular technological solution to use for each subfunction. To systematize
your decision making, it can be helpful to create a selection table, also
described in chapter 9. The selection table contains all possible technologies
you are considering for a subfunction and your assessments of each
technology along various selection attributes, including convenience,
reliability, and cost.
Step 5: Identify New Technological Solutions and How Those Might
Enable Further Innovations in Your Connected Strategy Not Identified
So Far

A big challenge for managers is to keep up with new technological
developments. We have found it very helpful to keep track of new
technologies by asking what subfunctions a new technology can facilitate.
Thus, as you discover or read about new technological advances, place
them into worksheet 10-5 or use the matrix you have filled out in worksheet
10-4.

WORKSHEET 10-4

Possible technological solutions for each subfunction
WORKSHEET 10-5

New technological solutions that would enable a new connected
strategy




   Cross-checking this against the “jobs to be done” you outlined earlier
can give you insights into possible new ways of implementing your
connected strategy: when a new technology emerges, it might enable a new
connected relationship or a new connection architecture.
   This type of bottom-up innovation is oftentimes referred to as
technology push. Rather than thinking about the needs of the customer, you
start with a given technology that substantially improves the execution of a
function. Then ask yourself, “How might we take advantage of technology
X?” For example, you might ask, “How can our business benefit from
advances in natural language processing or in augmented reality?” Place the
answers to these questions alongside the new technologies in worksheet 10-
5.
Workshop Summary
You have reached the end of the last workshop!
   Now is a good time to recap how these workshops connect to each other.
In workshop 1, you sketched out the efficiency frontier for your industry
and located your firm and your competitors relative to the frontier. Using a
connected strategy, your goal is to push out this frontier and break the
existing trade-off between willingness-to-pay and fulfillment costs.
   In workshop 2, we focused on creating a connected customer
relationship that will allow you to increase the willingness-to-pay of your
customers. To build such a relationship requires a deep understanding of the
entire customer journey so that you can refine your ability to recognize your
customers’ needs, translate those needs into an actionable request for a
desired solution, and respond in a timely and frictionless manner. Lastly, if
you can repeat this interaction many times, you might be able to climb up
the hierarchy of needs of your customers, allowing you to become a trusted
partner.
   In workshop 3, we focused on how you can create a connected delivery
model that allows you to create connected customer relationships at low
fulfillment costs. To this end, we asked you to think about different
connection architectures, revenue models, and technology infrastructure
solutions found in other industries. We hope that this trilogy of workshops
has helped you apply the concepts of connected strategy to your own
organization.
   We did our best to bring to life the interactive style of knowledge
transfer that we love so much in our work with students and executive
education audiences, but in this case using a very old and very unconnected
technology—a book. We already pointed you to our website (connected-
strategy.com) as one form of increased connectivity. The site has a
substantial amount of curated content and also allows you to post questions
and make suggestions for future content updates and new podcasts.
   Did we succeed in guiding you through the workshops, and have you
thus developed your own connected strategy? If you already worked
through some (or, ideally, all) of the three workshops in this book,
congratulations—you are done with the homework assignments. Give
yourself an A+. We are proud of you.
   If you read through this book but skipped the workshops (“I will get to
this later”), maybe feeling intimidated by the many questions and exhibits
or simply being too busy to do more than just read, please read on for just
one more page.
   In our view, simply reading about connected strategies without taking
any actions is just like sitting next to the pool wondering whether you
should get wet. If this adequately captures your position, allow us to give
you a final nudge (not push), hoping that you jump in.
   The hardest part in taking any journey (including strategic planning
processes) is taking the first step. In this spirit, let us propose a set of
alternative mini workshops with the request that you do one. This should
not take more than ten (!) minutes. So we are not asking you to jump into
the water, just to dip your toe in. Specifically, pick one of the following
tasks and then decide for yourself whether you want to do more:

          Share the example of Disney’s MagicBand with a colleague on
          your management team and discuss what you can learn from
          this.
          As a customer, sign up with a firm that provides a connected
          relationship you have not experienced before.
          Ask one of your customers how she experiences the episodes
          during which she connects to your firm, and then ask yourself
          how your firm connects with this customer.
          Discuss with one of your employees how efficiency could be
          improved through better connectivity.
          Ask somebody on your R&D or technology team about what
          technologies they are currently working on and how that might
          improve the connectivity to your customers.

  Take a shot at one of them and see where this leads you …
                           EPILOGUE

              Seizing the Connected
                Strategy Potential


After a great family day in the Disney theme park, you head back to your
hotel. Just as you leave, you meet him again. Captain Jack Sparrow calls out
to your six-year-old by name and waves goodbye, capping a truly magical
day. The power of these connected relationships is something to ponder.
Ordering your food without worrying about payment logistics, following a
customized itinerary through the park, and anticipating the great photo
collection you can browse on your flight home (thanks to the automated
documentation of your visit without your ever having to pull out a camera)
—all of these have got you smiling and thinking about how you could use
connected strategies to create competitive advantage for your business. Jack
Sparrow never met your child before and was relying on your MagicBand
to reveal your family’s identity. But that doesn’t bother you, nor do you
mind Disney’s healthy profit margins thanks to the remarkable efficiency of
the park’s operation. The magic of the connected strategy has your
attention.
   Now imagine Jack Sparrow turns to you and says in his best gravelly
pirate voice, “Thanks for your visit, matey. I found access to your financial
accounts and I saw that your asset allocation seemed to be underdiversified.
So I sold some of your bonds and bought gold for you. Arr, what else would
you expect a pirate to buy?” This entirely fictitious example is a textbook
application of our connected strategy framework. Jack recognized a
potential need, found a solution, and acted promptly. In fact, he created an
automatic execution customer experience for you. While some might be
delighted, chances are you are not amused.
    In this closing section, we want to reiterate a few critical points.
Connected strategy does not mean automating every possible transaction for
every customer. Automatic execution has its place and will become feasible
across ever-broader domains, but for many transactions what customers
want is help in making better decisions, not someone (or something) else
who makes decisions for them. The key to success for connected strategies
lies in understanding the connectivity preferences of your customers. Some
customers will enjoy receiving an automatically created photo album of
their trip; others will find it an invasion of privacy. Some like to be coached
in their behavior and derive value from being nudged; others find it
overbearing. And no customer likes his or her data to be misused. In the
excitement around technological advances that enable new connected
strategies, it is important to resist the temptations to create connectivity just
because we can and to monetize data indiscriminately just because no one is
stopping us yet. Put your customer first and remember that not all your
customers are the same. Building trust is at the heart of a connected
strategy, and that trust can be easily lost. Trouble can ensue unless you
show that the data your customer gave you creates value for him or her and
is not used in undesired ways.
    Another misconception that we have hopefully removed is that a
connected strategy is primarily about technology. Clearly, technology plays
an important role, and quite often new technology is what allows new
connected strategies to arise. But as we have described in detail, the
connected strategy is fundamentally a business model innovation. Not only
will you need to adopt new technologies, but you may also have to change
whom you interact with, how you charge for products and services, and
how you structure your company internally. To build a connected strategy
often requires restructuring your company to ensure the frictionless flow of
information within your organization and between you and your customer.
    With the ability to increase the customers’ willingness-to-pay while
reducing fulfillment costs, connected strategies have proved to be truly
disruptive in several industries. For you, this is both an opportunity and a
threat. We hope that our connected strategy framework and our workshop
chapters will help you in creating your own connected strategy. At the same
time, we hope that these tools will help you to look at changes in your
industry from a new perspective, separating technological hype from true
strategic challenges.
   There is no doubt that the dramatic increase in connectivity will
continue. You may or may not be thinking about connected strategies in
your industry, but it’s certain that others are. We have only seen the very
beginning of connected strategies!
SOURCES
                                        Prologue
For more details on how Disney introduced the MagicBand, listen to the podcast on our book
website, connected-strategy.com.
For more information on the MagicBand, see Austin Carr, “The Messy Business of Reinventing
Happiness,” Fast Company, April 15, 2015, https://www.fastcompany.com/3044283/the-messy-
business-of-reinventing-happiness; and Christian Terwiesch and Nicolaj Siggelkow, “When Fun Goes
Digital: Creating the Theme Park of the Future,” Knowledge@Wharton, April 4, 2018, http://
knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/future-theme-park-innovation/.
For a thorough discussion on how interconnected, smart devices can affect competition and
strategy, see Michael E. Porter and James E. Heppelman, “How Smart, Connected Products Are
Transforming Competition,” Harvard Business Review, November 2014, 64–88.
                                        Chapter 1
For very insightful early work on strategy in the context of the internet, see Michael E. Porter,
“Strategy and the Internet,” Harvard Business Review, March 2001, 62–78; Raphael Amit and
Christoph Zott, “Value Creation in E-business,” Strategic Management Journal 22, no. 6–7 (2001):
493–520; and Adrian J. Slywotzky, Karl Weber, and David J. Morrison, How Digital Is Your
Business? (New York: Crown Business, 2000).
For more detail on business models and business model design, see the following works by
Raphael Amit and Christoph Zott: “Business Model Design and the Performance of Entrepreneurial
Firms,” Organization Science 18, no. 2 (2007): 181–199; “The Fit between Product Market Strategy
and Business Model: Implications for Firm Performance,” Strategic Management Journal 29, no. 1
(2008): 1–26; “Business Model Design: An Activity System Perspective,” Long Range Planning 43,
nos. 2–3 (2010): 216–226.
For a discussion of the willingness-to-pay concept and foundational work on the concept of “value,”
see Adam M. Brandenburger and Harborne W. Stuart, Jr., “Value-Based Business Strategy,” Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy 5, no. 1 (1996): 5–24; and Adam M. Brandenburger and
Barry J. Nalebuff, Coopetition (New York: Doubleday, 1996).
The customer journey has its intellectual foundation in the work by Ian McMillan and Rita McGrath
on the consumption chain. See Ian MacMillan and Rita Gunther McGrath, “Discovering New Points
of Differentiation,” Harvard Business Review, July–August 1997, 133–138, 143–145; and Rita
Gunther McGrath and Ian MacMillan, The Entrepreneurial Mindset; Strategies for Continuously
Creating Opportunity in an Age of Uncertainty (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000).
For a wide-ranging discussion of new technologies and their impact on industries, firms, and society,
see Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New York: Norton, 2016); and Andrew McAfee and
Erik Brynjolfsson, Machine, Platform, Crowd: Harnessing Our Digital Future (New York: Norton,
2017).
The pioneering work of our colleagues at Penn, in particular Kevin G. Volpp and David A. Asch,
provides a number of great ideas for how patient care might be redesigned through the introduction
of principles of behavioral economics into the domain of medicine. We discuss several examples of
their research in other chapters.
The work by Christian Terwiesch, David Asch, and Kevin Volpp looks at problems of introducing
connected health care in greater detail. See Christian Terwiesch, David Asch, and Kevin Volpp,
“Technology and Medicine: Reimagining Provider Visits as the New Tertiary Care,” Annals of
Internal Medicine 167, no. 11 (2017): 814–815.
For a delightful exposition on the origins of the phrase “on the shoulders of giants,” see Robert K.
Merton, On the Shoulders of Giants: A Shandean Postscript (New York: Free Press, 1965).
For more on platform strategies, see Marshall W. Van Alstyne, Geoffrey G. Parker, and Sangeet
Paul Choudary, “Pipelines, Platforms, and the New Rules of Strategy,” Harvard Business Review,
April 2016, 54–60.
For the number of active Pokemon Go players, see Craig Smith, “85 Incredible Pokemon Go
Statistics and Facts,” DMR, May 5, 2018, https://expandedramblings.com/index.php/pokemon-go-
statistics/.
For more details on Rolls-Royce’s transition from products to services, see “Power by the Hour,”
Rolls-Royce, accessed October 24, 2018, https://www.rolls-royce.com/media/our-stories/discover
/2017/totalcare.aspx; and “Rolls-Royce and Microsoft Collaborate to Create New Digital
Capabilities,” Microsoft, April 20, 2016, https://customers.microsoft.com/en-US/story
/rollsroycestory.
                                          Chapter 2
For the size of the US grocery industry, see “Supermarket Facts,” FMI, accessed June 17, 2018,
https://www.fmi.org/our-research/supermarket-facts.
For the size of the Indian grocery market and information on BigBasket, see “Why India’s Online
Grocery Battle Is Heating Up,” Knowledge@Wharton, April 26, 2018,
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/indias-online-grocery-battle-heating/?
utm_source=kw_newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=2018-05-01.
Gerard Cachon and Christian Terwiesch discuss the classification of willingness-to-pay drivers in
further detail in Operations Management (New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2016).
For more on the concept of the “efficiency frontier,” see Michael E. Porter, “What Is Strategy?,”
Harvard Business Review, November–December 1996, 61–78.
For more information on Blue Apron, see Sarah Halzack, “Why This Start-up Wants to Put
Vegetables You’ve Never Heard of on Your Dinner Table,” Washington Post, June 15, 2016, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/06/15/why-this-start-up-wants-to-put-vegetables-
youve-never-heard-of-on-your-dinner-table/.
The efficiency frontier can be shifted by better matching supply with demand. This is also the title
of the book written by Cachon and Terwiesch: Gerard Cachon and Christian Terwiesch, Matching
Supply with Demand: An Introduction to Operations Management (New York: McGraw Hill
Education, 2012).
An interview with an Instacart executive can be found on our book website, connected-strategy.com.
For more information on Alibaba’s Hema stores, see Christine Chou, “Alibaba to Open 3 Hema
Stores in Xian in 2018,” Alizila, January 18, 2018, http://www.alizila.com/alibaba-open-3-hema-
stores-xian-2018/.
Pareto dominance also plays an important role in the notion of an efficient frontier in finance. When
making financial investments and allocating assets to investment portfolios, investors typically face a
risk-reward trade-off. Investments that have high expected returns, such as investments in venture
capital or private equity, typically also come with more risk (technically speaking, the standard
deviation of the returns is larger). According to Nobel laureate Harry Markowitz, the efficient frontier
is characterized by those investment portfolios for which no other portfolios exists that achieves a
higher expected return for the same standard deviation of return (risk). Investors care about both
characteristics of their portfolio, expected returns (that they would like to be high) and risk (that they
would prefer to be low). Some investors might prefer an expected return of 10% and a standard
deviation of returns of 4% over one with an expected return of 6% and a standard deviation of 2%.
Some more risk-averse investors might prefer it the other way around. However, no rational investor
would prefer an expected return of 6% and a standard deviation of 4% over one with 10% expected
return and a standard deviation of 2%. It is said that the former is Pareto dominated by the latter.
Thus, the efficient frontier is the set of investments that are not Pareto dominated. For the
foundational treatise, see H. M. Markowitz, “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance 7, no. 1 (1952):
77–91.
For times at which surge pricing happens for Uber, see Peter Cohen, Robert Hahn, Jonathan Hall,
Steven Levitt, and Robert Metcalfe, “Using Big Data to Estimate Consumer Surplus: The Case of
Uber” (NBER Working Paper No. 22627, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA,
September 2016), https://doi.org/10.3386/w22627.
The details of efficiency and its relationship to capacity utilization are discussed as part of a lean
operations framework in the book written by Cachon and Terwiesch: Gerard Cachon and Christian
Terwiesch, Operations Management (New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2016).
All data on the New York City cab operations is taken from the reports issued by the New York
Taxi and Limousine Commission, accessed June 18, 2018, http://www.nyc.gov/html/tlc/html
/technology/industry_reports.shtml.
All Uber data is taken from a case study written by our colleague Gerard Cachon, “Uber: Charging
Up and Down,” The Wharton School, 2018, as well as from Jonathan V. Hall and Alan B. Kruger,
“An Analysis for the Labor Market for Uber’s Driver-Partners in the United States” (working paper,
January 2015), http://arks.princeton.edu/ark:/88435/dsp010z708z67d, and Judd Cramer and Alan B.
Kruger, “Disruptive Change in the Taxi Business: The Case of Uber” (NBER working paper No.
22083, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, March 2016), https://www.nber.org
/papers/w22083.
An interview with a HomeAway executive can be found on our book website, connected-
strategy.com.
For more information on Goodr, featured in the sidebar, see Ben Paynter, “This App Delivers
Leftover Food to the Hungry, Instead of to the Trash,” Fast Company, May 3, 2018, https://www
.fastcompany.com/40562448/this-app-delivers-leftover-food-to-the-hungry-instead-of-the-trash.
For average vehicle occupancy, see the National Household Travel Survey by the Federal Highway
Administration: “National Household Travel Survey,” US Department of Transportation Federal
Highway Administration, accessed June 18, 2018, https://nhts.ornl.gov/.
For data on Match.com, see “Match.com Information, Statistics, Facts and History,” Dating Sites
Reviews, last modified May 28, 2018, https://www.datingsitesreviews.com/staticpages/index.php?
page=Match-com-Statistics-Facts-History.
The elements of willingness-to-pay have also been discussed by Cachon and Terwiesch in
Operations Management.
For the Target story, see Charles Duhigg, “How Companies Learn Your Secrets,” New York Times
Magazine, February 16, 2012, https://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/19/magazine/shopping-habits.html.
For more information on Cambridge Analytica’s use of Facebook data, see Matthew Rosenberg,
Nicholas Confessore, and Carole Cadwalladr, “How Trump Consultants Exploited the Facebook Data
of Millions,” New York Times, March 17, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/17/us/politics
/cambridge-analytica-trump-campaign.html.
For information on Google apps using location data, see Ryan Nakashima, “Google Tracks Your
Movements, Like It or Not,” AP News, August 13, 2018, https://apnews.com
/828aefab64d4411bac257a07c1af0ecb.
For more on the topic of whether Uber drivers should be considered employees, see Daniel
Wiessner, “US Judge Says Uber Drivers Are Not Company’s Employees,” Reuters Business News,
April 12, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-uber-lawsuit/u-s-judge-says-uber-drivers-are-not-
companys-employees-idUSKBN1HJ31I.
For the clash between Airbnb and local cities concerning regulation, see Scott Zamost, Hannah
Kliot, Morgan Brennan, Samantha Kummerer, and Lora Kolodny, “Unwelcome Guests: Airbnb,
Cities Battle over Illegal Short-Term Rentals,” CNBC News, May 24, 2018, https://www.cnbc.com
/2018/05/23/unwelcome-guests-airbnb-cities-battle-over-illegal-short-term-rentals.html.
For the use of Amazon Echo recordings in a murder case, see Eliott C. McLaughlin, “Suspect OKs
Amazon to Hand Over Echo Recordings in Murder Case,” CNN, April 26, 2017, https://www.cnn
.com/2017/03/07/tech/amazon-echo-alexa-bentonville-arkansas-murder-case/index.html.
                                       Chapter 3
For the argument that power tools compete with neckties, see Michael E. Porter, “The Five
Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, January 2008, 79–93.
                                        Chapter 4
For more on the expanded role of “search”—e.g., in creating curated offering—see Stefan Weitz,
Search (Brookline, MA: Bibliomotion, 2014).
For more details on the examples in the sidebar on true personalization, see “Cosmetics Industry in
the U.S.—Statistics & Facts,” Statista, accessed June 18, 2018, https://www.statista.com/topics/1008
/cosmetics-industry/. Also see “Shiseido Americas Announces bareMinerals® First Brand to Launch
Customized by MATCHCo Technology with the Introduction of the MADE-2-FIT App for
iPhone®,” Cision PR Newswire, June 20, 2017, https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/shiseido
-americas-announces-bareminerals-first-brand-to-launch-customized-by-matchco-technology-with-
the-introduction-of-the-made-2-fit-app-for-iphone-300476833.html. For more information, see Rina
Raphael, “Is Customization the Future of the Beauty Industry?,” Fast Company, October 14, 2016,
https://www.fastcompany.com/3064239/is-customization-the-future-of-the-beauty-industry. For
information on 3-D printing of drugs, see Benedict, “$5K Vitae Industries AutoCompounder Can
3D Print Personalized Drugs in 10 Minutes,” 3ders.org, December 15, 2017, https://www.3ders.org
/articles/20171215-vitae-industries-autocompounder-can-3d-print-personalized-drugs-in-10-minutes
.html. See also “The Future of 3D Printing Drugs in Pharmacies Is Closer Than You Think,” Medical
Futurist, May 4, 2017, http://medicalfuturist.com/future-3d-printing-drugs-pharmacies-closer-think/.
For more detail on the examples in the sidebar on coach behavior wearable sensors, see “Discover
Two New Wearable Technologies,” La Roche-Posay, accessed June 18, 2018, https://www.laroche-
posay.us/wearable-tech.html; and Michael Sawh, “The Best Smart Clothing: From Biometric Shirts
to Contactless Payment Jackets,” Wareable, April 16, 2018, https://www.wareable.com/smart-
clothing/best-smart-clothing.
For more details on the examples in the sidebar on automated execution with video games, see
Dylan Matthews, “Humans Have Spent More Time Watching Gangnam Style Than Writing All of
Wikipedia,” Vox, June 7, 2014, https://www.vox.com/2014/6/7/5786480/humans-have-spent-more-
time-watching-gangnam-style-than-writing-all. For information on how long individual players spend
playing World of Warcraft, see Pin-Yun Tarng, Kuan-Ta Chen, and Polly Huang, “An Analysis of
WoW Players’ Game Hours,” NetGames 2008: Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop
on Network and System Support for Games (2008): 47–52, http://www.iis.sinica.edu.tw/~swc/pub
/wow_player_game_hours.html. For more information on the gaming industry, see Robert Lee
Hotz, “When Gaming Is Good for You,” Wall Street Journal, March 13, 2012. For a classification of
player types, see Richard Bartle, “Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who Suit MUDs,”
Mud.co.uk, August 28, 1996, http://mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm. For the concept of “flow,” see
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: HarperCollins,
1991).
In medicine, the term automatic hovering was introduced in a New England Journal of Medicine
article by David A. Asch, Ralph W. Muller, and Kevin G. Volpp. See David A. Asch, Ralph W.
Muller, and Kevin G. Volpp, “Automated Hovering in Health Care—Watching Over the 5000
Hours,” New England Journal of Medicine 367 (2012): 1–3.
                                        Chapter 5
For the number of teachers in the United States, see “Fast Facts,” National Center for Education
Statistics, accessed June 18, 2018, https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=372.
For more on the Khan Academy, see “About,” Khan Academy, accessed June 18, 2018, https://www
.khanacademy.org/about.
An interview with a Lynda.com executive can be found on our book website, connected-
strategy.com.
The Mack Institute report by Christian Terwiesch and Karl T. Ulrich discusses the disruptive
potential of online teaching. See Christian Terwiesch and Karl T. Ulrich, “Will Video Kill the
Classroom Star? The Threat and Opportunity of Massively Open Online Courses for Full-Time MBA
Programs,” Mack Institute for Innovation Management, July 16, 2014, http://www.ktulrich.com
/uploads/6/1/7/1/6171812/terwiesch-ulrich-mooc-16jul2014.pdf.
An interview with a Rosetta Stone executive can be found on our book website.
For more information on artificial intelligence and deep learning, see Robert D. Hof, “Deep
Learning: Artificial Intelligence Is Finally Getting Smart,” MIT Technology Review, 2013, https://
www.technologyreview.com/s/513696/deep-learning/.
For an insightful discussion of how increased connectivity among products and services requires
changes within organizations, see Michael E. Porter and James E. Heppelman, “How Smart,
Connected Products Are Transforming Companies,” Harvard Business Review, October 2015, 97–
114.
For the market share of Amazon, at least when we were writing this book, see Rani Molla,
“Amazon Could Be Responsible for Nearly Half of U.S. E-commerce Sales in 2017,” Recode,
October 24, 2017, https://www.recode.net/2017/10/24/16534100/amazon-market-share-ebay-walmart
-apple-ecommerce-sales-2017.
For more information on the costs of nonadherence for asthma medication, mentioned in the
sidebar, see Aurel O. Iuga and Maura J. McGuire, “Adherence and Health Care Costs,” Risk
Management and Healthcare Policy 7 (2014): 35–44; and Adherence to Long-Term Therapies:
Evidence for Action (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2013), http://www.who.int/chp/knowledge
/publications/adherence_full_report.pdf.
We found the material from the Stanford d.School very helpful in articulating the framework of the
how-why ladder. See “Welcome,” Stanford d.School, accessed June 18, 2018, https://dschool
.stanford.edu/.
For the study concerning adherence to medication after cardiac treatment, see Kevin G. Volpp et
al., “Effect of Electronic Reminders, Financial Incentives, and Social Support on Outcomes after
Myocardial Infarction,” JAMA Internal Medicine 177, no. 8 (June 2017): 1093–1101.
For more information on Netflix and a list of Netflix genres, see Rani Molla, “Netflix Now Has
Nearly 118 Million Streaming Subscribers Globally,” Recode, January 22, 2018, https://www.recode
.net/2018/1/22/16920150/netflix-q4-2017-earnings-subscribers; and “Complete Searchable List of
Netflix Genres with Links,” Finder, last modified June 6, 2018, https://www.finder.com/netflix/genre
-list.
For the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development guidelines, see The OECD
Privacy Framework (OECD, 2013), http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecd_privacy_framework
.pdf. Also see Anna E. Shimanek, “Do You Want Milk with Those Cookies? Complying with Safe
Harbor Privacy Principles,” Journal of Corporation Law 26, no. 2 (2001): 455, 462–463.
For the EU guidelines, see “GDPR Key Changes,” EUGDPR, accessed November 24, 2018, https://
eugdpr.org/the-regulation/.
                                        Chapter 7
For data on car2go, see “Get In and Drive Off: Free-Floating Carsharing with car2go,” Daimler,
accessed June 18, 2018, https://www.daimler.com/products/services/mobility-services/car2go/. For
information on the merger with BMW’s ReachNow, see Nat Levy, “Car2go and ReachNow Car-
Sharing Services to Merge in Deal between Auto Giants Daimler, BMW,” Geekwire, March 28,
2018, https://www.geekwire.com/2018/car2go-reachnow-car-sharing-services-merge-deal-auto-
giants-daimler-bmw/.
For more information on Carnival’s medallion, see Brooks Barnes, “Coming to Carnival Cruises: A
Wearable Medallion That Records Your Every Whim,” New York Times, January 4, 2017, https://
www.nytimes.com/2017/01/04/business/media/coming-to-carnival-cruises-a-wearable-medallion-that
-records-your-every-whim.html.
For more details on the examples in the sidebar on e-scooter and battery sharing, see Bérénice
Magistretti, “Gogoro Raises $300 Million for Its Battery-Swapping Technology,” VentureBeat,
September 19, 2017, https://venturebeat.com/2017/09/19/gogoro-raises-300-million-for-its-battery-
swapping-technology/; and Karen Hao, “The Future of Transportation May Be about Sharing
Batteries, Not Vehicles,” Quartz Media, September 25, 2017, https://qz.com/1084282/the-future-of-
transportation-may-be-about-sharing-batteries-not-vehicles/. Bike sharing and e-scooter sharing are
also discussed in one of the podcasts on our book website, connected-strategy.com.
For more details on the sidebar on the Pandora of the art world, see Molly Schuetz, “New York’s
Artsy Is Making It Even Easier to Buy Art Online,” Bloomberg, March 27, 2018, https://www
.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-03-27/new-york-s-artsy-is-making-it-even-easier-to-buy-art-
online. For more details on the art classification scheme that Artsy has developed, see “The Art
Genome Project,” Artsy, accessed June 18, 2018, https://www.artsy.net/categories; and Shahan
Mufti, “Artsy’s ‘Genome’ Predicts What Paintings You Will Like,” Wired, November 23, 2011,
https://www.wired.com/2011/11/mf_artsy/all/1/.
A thorough discussion of direct-to-consumer companies, and the observation that customer
acquisition costs are the new rent, see Tom Foster, “Over 400 Startups Are Trying to Become the
Next Warby Parker. Inside the Wild Race to Overthrow Every Consumer Category,” Inc., May 2018,
https://www.inc.com/magazine/201805/tom-foster/direct-consumer-brands-middleman-warby-parker
.html.
For data on Kickstarter, see “Stats,” Kickstarter, accessed November 23, 2018, https://www
.kickstarter.com/help/stats.
For data on DonorsChoose.org, see “Impact,” DonorsChoose.org, accessed November 23, 2018,
https://www.donorschoose.org/about/impact.html.
For more information on Crisis Text Line, see Alice Gregory, “R U There? A New Counselling
Service Harnesses the Power of the Text Message,” New Yorker, February 9, 2015, https://www
.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/02/09/r-u. For access to data collected by Crisis Text Line, see
“Crisis Trends,” Crisis Text Line, accessed November 23, 2018, https://crisistrends.org/.
                                       Chapter 8
For average spending on dental care, see Health Policy Institute, “U.S. Dental Expenditures: 2017
Update,” American Dental Association, accessed June 18, 2018,
https://www.ada.org/~/media/ADA/Science%20and%20Research/HPI/Files/HPIBrief_1217_1.pdf?
la=en.
For more information on Abilify, see “FDA Approves Pill with Sensor That Digitally Tracks If
Patients Have Ingested Their Medication,” US Food and Drug Administration, November 13, 2017,
https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm584933.htm.
For more information on Fitbit, see Stephanie Baum, “Fitbit Plans to Submit Sleep Apnea, AFib
Detection Tools for FDA Clearance,” MedCity News, February 27, 2018, https://medcitynews.com
/2018/02/fitbit-plans-to-submit-sleep-apnea-afib-detection-tools-for-fda-clearance/.
In the context of the limits of traditional revenue models, we found the work by Karan Girotra and
Serguei Netessine very insightful. In their book on business model innovation, they outline how to
create a business model that is more robust in an uncertain environment. The authors discuss how
value can be created by overcoming these inefficiencies. See Karan Girotra and Serguei Netessine,
The Risk-Driven Business Model: Four Questions That Will Define Your Company (Boston: Harvard
Business Review Press, 2014).
For the study concerning reimbursement of retinal photographs, see David A. Asch, Christian
Terwiesch, and Kevin G. Volpp, “How to Reduce Primary Care Doctors’ Workloads while Improving
Care,” Harvard Business Review, November 2017.
For more information on Rolls-Royce’s revenue model, see “ ‘Power by the Hour’: Can Paying Only
for Performance Redefine How Products Are Sold and Serviced?,” Knowledge@Wharton, February
21, 2007, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/power-by-the-hour-can-paying-only-for-
performance-redefine-how-products-are-sold-and-serviced/.
The work by Marco Iansiti and Roy Levien further discusses the idea of moving the focus from the
supply chain to the ecosystem. See Marco Iansiti and Roy Levien, “Strategy as Ecology,” Harvard
Business Review, March 2004, 68–78, 126.
For a great discussion on when and how freemium models work, see Vineet Kumar, “Making
‘Freemium’ Work,” Harvard Business Review, May 2014, 27–29.
For more detail on Tencent and WeChat, see Eveline Chao, “How WeChat Became China’s App for
Everything,” Fast Company, January 2, 2017, https://www.fastcompany.com/3065255/china-wechat-
tencent-red-envelopes-and-social-money.
For data on in-app purchases, see “These 25 Wildly Popular Android Games Are Raking in the
Most Cash from In-App Purchases,” ZDNet, April 17, 2017, https://www.zdnet.com/pictures/25-
wildly-popular-android-games-raking-in-the-most-cash-from-in-app-purchases/26/.
For the number of Amazon Prime members, see Heather Kelly, “Amazon Reveals It Has More Than
100 Million Prime Members,” CNN Tech, April 19, 2018, http://money.cnn.com/2018/04/18
/technology/amazon-100-million-prime-members/index.html.
For the prices of Google AdWords, see Elisa Gabbert, “The 25 Most Expensive Keywords in
AdWords—2017 Edition!,” WordStream Blog, last updated September 12, 2018, https://www
.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2017/06/27/most-expensive-keywords.
                                         Chapter 9
The product development book by Karl T. Ulrich and Steven D. Eppinger explains several
approaches to deconstruction (the authors talk about decomposition). In its chapter on concept
generation, the book provides an excellent guide for how to generate a large number of concepts in
response to a given set of needs. See Karl T. Ulrich and Steven D. Eppinger, Product Design and
Development, 6th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2015).
For more details on the sidebar on applying the STAR approach to a new schizophrenia drug, see
Kanika Monga and Olivia Myrick, “Digital Pill That ‘Talks’ to Your Smartphone Approved for First
Time,” ABC News, November 15, 2017, http://abcnews.go.com/Health/digital-pill-talks-smartphone-
approved-time/story?id=51161456.
In table 9-1, we note that one “job to be done” is to “[a]ssess delight of user with coffee brand
using physiological measurements.” For work in this direction, see Cipresso Pietro, Serino Silvia, and
Riva Giuseppe, “The Pursuit of Happiness Measurement: A Psychometric Model Based on
Psychophysiological Correlates,” Scientific World Journal 2014 (2014): 1–15, http://dx.doi.org/10
.1155/2014/139128.
The computer network textbook by Andrew S. Tanenbaum and David J. Wetherall provides a detailed
discussion of the stack framework, especially the Open Systems Interconnection model. See
Andrew S. Tanenbaum and David J. Wetherall, Computer Networks, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2010). See also Norman F. Schneidewind, Computer, Network, Software, and
Hardware Engineering with Applications (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-IEEE Press, 2012).
The classification tree framework is also inspired by Ulrich and Eppinger, Product Design and
Development. It provides an effective method for exploring a broad array of design approaches for a
given design problem. In his book Design: Creation of Artifacts in Society (Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania, 2011), Karl T. Ulrich further examines the power of exploring a design space with a
tree-based approach.
Christian Terwiesch and Karl Ulrich, in Innovation Tournaments: Creating and Selecting Exceptional
Opportunities (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2009), distinguish between two types of
innovation techniques, internal and external search. External search is about scanning the
environment for new ideas, oftentimes benefiting from domain arbitrage. A technology might be well
established in one industry but still not be used at all in another industry.
The concept of a selection table is discussed in Product Design and Development by Ulrich and
Eppinger in the context of product development. The underlying approach of comparing a set of
decision alternatives along a number of criteria is often referred to as multiattribute decision making
and has a long tradition in decision sciences.
For a history of voice recognition, see Melanie Pinola, “Speech Recognition through the Decades:
How We Ended Up with Siri,” PCWorld, November 2, 2011, https://www.pcworld.com/article
/243060/speech_recognition_through_the_decades_how_we_ended_up_with_siri.html.
In Innovation Tournaments, Terwiesch and Ulrich discuss how innovation can sometimes be
triggered by an unmet need but also can occur when a new solution approach is invented. In their
work, the authors define innovation as a novel match between solution and need.
For information on digital twins, see Michael Grieves, “Digital Twin: Manufacturing Excellence
through Virtual Factory Replication,” white paper, 2014, http://innovate.fit.edu/plm/documents/doc
_mgr/912/1411.0_Digital_Twin_White_Paper_Dr_Grieves.pdf.
For more background on Heller’s application, see “Appsolute Efficiency,” Siemens, accessed
October 24, 2018, https://www.siemens.com/customer-magazine/en/home/industry/manufacturing-
industry/heller-appsolute-efficiency.html.
For more information on the sidebar on delivery via drones, see “Lifesaving Deliveries by Drone,”
Zipline, accessed June 19, 2018, http://www.flyzipline.com/.
An interview with a Volocopter executive can be found on our book website, connected-
strategy.com.
For the origins of the bracelet monitoring device, see Matt Allyn, “Spider-Man Created the
Electronic Bracelet?!,” Esquire, May 4, 2007, https://www.esquire.com/news-politics/news/a2164
/spiderman022007/.
                                       Chapter 10
For an excellent discussion of the various business uses of augmented reality for both sensing and
responding, see Michael E. Porter and James E. Heppelmann, “Why Every Organization Needs an
Augmented Reality Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, November–December 2017, 46–57.
For the impact of blockchain technology on trust, see Kevin Werbach, The Blockchain and the
New Architecture of Trust (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2018).
For the possible economy-wide impact of 3-D printing, see Richard D’Aveni, The Pan-Industrial
Revolution: How New Manufacturing Titans Will Transform the World (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2018).
                                         INDEX


Note: Page numbers in italics followed by f, t, and w refer to figures, tables, and worksheets,
respectively.

      Abilify, 176, 204
      accessibility, 52–55
      Adherium SmartInhaler, 106
      advertising revenue, 190–191
      AdWords, 190
      Airbnb
         crowd orchestrator architecture, 13, 38, 163–164, 171, 221
         customer experience, 70
      Alexa (Amazon), 196, 209
      Alibaba, 28, 29f
      alternatives, identification of, 206–208, 209t
      Amazon
         Alexa, 196, 209
         AmazonFresh, 24
         Amazon Go stores, 29
         Amazon Web Services, 186
         connection architecture, 13, 154, 156, 158, 171
         customization by, 102
         drone delivery, 213
         Marketplace, 158, 171
         Prime, 189–190
         respond-to-desire customer experience, 6, 70
      analyzing technologies, 227
      Angie’s List, 159, 183
      Apple, 12, 99, 115, 205, 210, 211
      Art Genome Project, 160
      artificial intelligence (AI), 84–85
      Artsy, 160
      Asch, David, 11
      asthma inhalers, repeat loop with, 106
      AstraZeneca, 106
      attributes, product, 52–53
      augmented reality, 14, 42, 228
      automatic execution
  characteristics of, 8, 77–79, 78f
  information flow in, 81t, 83
  limitations of, 236
  use cases for, 87–88, 88t
  with video games, 80
automatic hovering, 11, 83, 87, 109
Avis Budget Group, 155

Bad Ass Mom Box, 154
BareMinerals Made-2-Fit foundation, 73
BarkBox, 154
Bell Labs, 210
Betterment, 153–154
BigBasket, 27
BlaBlaCar, 11, 40–41
blockchain technology, 39, 227
Blue Apron
  competitive advantage of, 42–43
  curated offering, 71, 154
  disruptive potential of, 47
  efficiency frontier in, 24–26, 27f, 29f
BMW, 151
bottom-up innovation, 209–213
bracelet monitoring devices, 208, 215
  See also Disney MagicBand
brainstorming, 51–52
Brandenburger, Adam M., 11
Brother Refresh program, 79
Brynjolfsson, Erik, 11
business-to-business connected strategies, 16
Busy Bee Stationery, 154

cab operations, 32–35, 37
Cambridge Analytica, 46
Car2go, 150–151
Careem, 29
Carnival, 152–153
car-sharing services, 150–151, 155
   See also ride-hailing industry
Chinese grocery market, 28–29
Clash of Clans, 187
classification trees, 206–208, 207f
coach behavior
   characteristics of, 7–8, 73–76, 75f
   information flow in, 81t, 82–83
   use cases for, 87, 88t
competition, ranking, 55–58
competitive advantage, 42–43
   See also repeated interactions
complementary products, revenues from, 167
connected customer relationships
  See customer relationships
connected delivery model
  See delivery model
connected market makers, 157–161, 158f, 171
connected producers, 148–153, 149f, 170–171
connected retailers, 153–157, 153f, 171
connected strategy, definition of, 15
connected-strategy.com website, 17, 49
connected strategy framework, 1–4, 3f
connected strategy matrix
  benefits of, 14, 172
  components of, 168–170, 169f
  mapping, 218–220, 223w
  strategy development with, 220–222
  worksheets for, 219w, 223w
connection architecture
  connected market makers, 157–161, 158f, 171
  connected producers, 148–153, 149f, 170–171
  connected retailers, 153–157, 153f, 171
  crowd orchestrators, 161–165, 162f, 171–172
  definition of, 4
  need for, 147–148
  peer-to-peer network creators, 165–168, 168f, 172
  role of, 10–11
  See also connected strategy matrix
consumption utility, 52
cost of ownership, 52–55, 54w
cost reduction
  competitive advantage and, 42–43
  with deeper connections, 31–35
  diagnostic questions, 50–51
  dynamic pricing strategies, 35–41
  with new connections, 35–41
  potential for, 46–47, 51–52
  See also efficiency frontier; revenue models; willingness-to-pay
Couchsurfing, 41
Coup, 156
Crisis Text Line, 165
crowd orchestrators
  connection architecture for, 161–165, 162f, 171–172
  not-for-profit, 164–165
curated offering customer experience
  characteristics of, 7, 70–73, 72f
  information flow in, 81t, 82
  use cases for, 87, 88t
Curb app, 33
customer experiences
  artificial intelligence and, 84–85
  automatic execution, 8, 77–80, 78f, 81t, 83, 87–88, 88t
  brainstorming strategies for, 51–52
  coach behavior, 7–8, 73–76, 75f, 81t, 82–83, 87, 88t
  competitive advantage, 42–43
  connections, benefits of, 35–41, 38t
  curated offering, 7, 70–73, 72f, 81t, 82, 87, 88t
  diagnostic questions for, 50–51
  disruptive potential of, 46–47
  domains of application, 86–88, 88t
  fulfillment costs, 136–141
  Goodr case study, 39
  information flow, 79–83, 81t, 131–133
  pain points, 31–35, 34t, 126–130, 136–141
  respond-to-desire, 5–6, 67–70, 69f, 81t, 82, 86–87, 88t
  summary of, 89–90
  unified experiences across episodes, 98–101
  See also customer journey; efficiency frontier; trust; willingness-to-pay
customer journey
  mapping, 122–125
  pain points, 31–35, 34t, 126–130, 136–141
  phases of, 63–67, 66f
  worksheet for, 125w
  See also willingness-to-pay
customer relationships
  components of, 1–3, 3f
  definition of, 64
  goals of, 122
  importance of, 8–9
  See also customer experiences; repeated interactions
customization
  customer-level learning, 101–103, 103f, 134–136
  levels of, 110–111, 111t, 113, 118–119
  population-level learning, 103–107, 107f
  why-how ladder, 107–110, 109f, 133–134
  See also curated offering customer experience

Daimler, 10, 150–151, 171
da shang, 187–188
data payments, 190–193
data privacy, 44–46, 144
dating platforms, 41
deconstruction
   business application of, 225–228
   dimensions of, 198–201, 202t–203t
   worksheet for, 226w
deep learning, 84–85
delivery model, 3–4, 3f
   See also connection architecture; revenue models; technology infrastructure
diagnostic questions, 50–51
Didi, 29
digital twins, 212
Disney MagicBand
  competitive advantage of, 2, 235
  connection architecture, 6–7, 100–101, 152–153, 170
  as innovation of existing technology, 208, 215
  revenue model, 14
  rewards of, 34
Dollar Shave Club, 174
DonorsChoose.org, 164
Dragon Dictate, 210
drone delivery, 213
Dropbox, 186
dynamic pricing, 35–41, 178

Earnest, 149–150
EasyTaxi app, 33
eBay, 164
economies of scale, 114–115
ecosystem, 184–185
education, efficiency frontier in, 94–98, 95f
efficiency frontier
   competitive advantage and, 5, 42–43
   concept of, 22–24, 23f
   disruptive potential of, 47
   in education, 94–98, 95f
   in grocery retailing, 24–29
   Pareto dominance and, 30, 241
   in ride-hailing industry, 29, 31
   sketching, 55–59
   worksheet for, 56w
   See also willingness-to-pay
eHarmony, 41
episodic interactions
   See repeated interactions
e-scooter industry, 156
European Union General Data Protection Regulation, 117, 193
Expedia, 158–159, 171
external search, 248

Facebook, 13, 46, 159, 161, 190, 192
fees-at-risk revenue model, 184
financial services
   connected producers, 149–150
   crowd orchestrators, 161–162
   customer needs in, 147–148
   peer-to-peer network creators, 165–168
fit attributes, 52–53
Fitbit, 83, 176–177
Ford, Henry, 91
freemium revenue models, 186–187
friction, 53
   See also cost reduction
fulfillment cost
   definition of, 23
   in education, 95, 95f
   in meal-kit delivery services, 25–26
   reduction of, 136–141
   See also efficiency frontier

gaming industry, 80, 187
General Data Protection Regulation, 117, 193
General Motors, 151
GetTaxi app, 33
Gillette, 174
Gobble, 154
Gogoro, 156
Goodr, 39
Google
  AdWords, 190
  connection architecture, 152, 159, 161
  Nest thermostat, 196
  revenue models, 186, 188, 190
  voice recognition technology, 210–211
Grab, 29
Green Chef, 154
grocery retailing
  efficiency frontier in, 22–24, 23f
  willingness-to-pay, 27–29
  See also meal-kit delivery services

haggling, 178
health care space, revenue models for
   See revenue models
Heller, 212
HelloFresh, 24, 43, 154
Hema app (Alibaba), 28, 29f
hidden Markov chains, 210
hierarchy of needs, 108, 112–114, 142, 144, 152, 189, 232
HomeAway, 38
Homeplus app (Tesco), 28, 29f
hovering, automatic, 11, 83, 87, 109
HP Instant Ink program, 77, 79

IBM, 152, 186, 210
in-app purchases, 187
Indian grocery market, 27
information, limitations in, 178, 180
information flow
   dimensions of, 79–83, 81t
   identifying and documenting, 131–133
   worksheet for, 132w
infrastructure-as-a-service revenue model, 186
innovation, 209–213, 236–237, 249
Instacart, 26–27, 171
Instagram, 192
Instant Ink program (HP), 77, 79
Internet of Things, xi, 10, 77, 212
iRobot Roomba, 196
IronPlanet, 159, 160

JD, 29
Jobs, Steve, 205, 208

Kayak, 38–39
Khan, Salman, 92, 95–96
Khan Academy, 92
Kickstarter, 161–162, 171

learning analytics
   customer-level learning, 101–103, 103f, 134–136
   population-level learning, 103–107, 107f
   repeat dimension and, 110–115, 112f
LendingTree, 157
LinkedIn, 167, 186–187, 190
loan providers
   See financial services
L’Oréal, 76
Love, Jack, 215
Lyft, 5, 10, 31, 70, 115
Lynda.com, 93, 102, 107

Mack Institute for Innovation Management, 10, 262–263
MagicBand
  See Disney MagicBand
market makers, connected, 157–161, 158f, 171
Markowitz, Harry, 241
Match.com, 41, 167
McAfee, Andrew, 11
McGrath, Rita Gunther, 11
McGraw-Hill, 2, 7–9, 102
McMillan, Ian C., 11
meal-kit delivery services
  curated offering, 71
  efficiency frontier in, 24–29, 27f, 29f
membership revenues, 166–167
micropayment revenue models, 187–188
Microsoft, 186, 210
Mint, 191
MyTaxi app, 33

Nadi X pants, 76
Nalebuff, Barry J., 11
needs, recognition of
  See recognition of needs
Nest thermostat, 196
Netflix, 71, 82, 113, 155, 171
Netsuite, 186
network effects, 115
neural networks, 85
New York City cab operations, 32–35, 37
Niantic, 14
Nike, 7, 167, 170, 186
Nintendo, 14
not-for-profit crowd orchestrators, 164–165

Ola, 29
OnDeck, 149–150
OpenTable, 38, 159
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 117
ownership, cost of, 52–55

P2P
   See peer-to-peer (P2P) network creators
pain points
   identification of, 126–130, 136–141
   in ride-hailing industry, 31–35
   worksheets for, 130w, 139w
Pareto dominance, 30, 241
PatientsLikeMe, 41
pay-as-you-go revenue model, 185–188
pay-for-data revenue model, 192–193
pay-for-performance revenue model, 183–184
pay-with-data revenue model, 190–193
PeachDish, 154
peer-to-peer (P2P) network creators, 165–168, 168f, 172
performance, pricing contingent on, 183–184
performance attributes, 52
personalization
   See customization
PillsyCap, 176
platform-as-a-service revenue model, 186
platform strategies, 12–13
population-level learning, 103–107, 107f
Porter, Michael E., 11, 57
posted prices, 178
power purchase agreements (PPAs), 184
Priceline, 158–159, 171
pricing
   dynamic, 178
   posted prices, 178
   surge, 35–41
   See also revenue models
privacy concerns, 44–46, 116–118, 144
producers, connected, 148–153, 149f, 170–171
product handoff function, 208
Progressive Insurance, 151–152
Prosper, 161
Purple Carrot, 154

QQ Show, 187

reacting technologies, 228
recognition of needs
   in repeated interactions, 98–101
   role of, 3, 64–67, 66t, 199
   STAR approach to, 200–201, 203t–204t
   why-how ladder, 107–110, 109f, 133–134
referral fees, 191
reinvestment into relationships, 189–190
Rent the Runway, 155
repeated interactions
   competitive advantage and, 110–115, 112f
   customer-level learning in, 101–103, 103f, 134–136
   data-protection policies, 116–118
   examples of, 91–94
   improving customer experiences with, 141–144
   population-level learning in, 103–107, 107f
   recognition of needs in, 107–110
   role in connected strategy framework, 3–4, 199
   STAR approach to, 200–201, 202t–203t
   summary of, 118–119
   unified customer experiences across, 98–101
   worksheet for, 143w
   See also trust
requests
   role in connected strategy framework, 3, 64–67, 66f, 199
   STAR approach to, 200–201, 202t–203t
   strengthening through repeated interactions, 101–103
respond-to-desire customer experience
   characteristics of, 6–7, 67–70, 69f
   information flow in, 81t, 82
   use cases for, 86–87, 88t
response
   role in connected strategy framework, 3, 64–67, 66f, 199
   STAR approach to, 200–201, 202t–203t
   strengthening through repeated interactions, 103–107, 107f
   See also respond-to-desire customer experience
retailers, connected, 153–157, 153f, 171
retinal photographs, insurance reimbursement of, 181–182
revenue models
   complementary products, 167
   creation of, 222, 224
   definition of, 174
   ecosystem for, 184–185
   examples of, 173–177
   fees for information, 167
   limitations of, 179–181
   pay-as-you-go, 185–188
   pay-for-data, 192–193
   pay-for-performance, 183–184
   pay-with-data, 190–193
   reinvestment into relationship, 189–190
   role in connected strategy framework, 4, 14
   summary of, 193–194
   traditional, 178–179
   transaction or membership revenues, 166–167
   value creation, 181–183
   See also cost reduction
ride-hailing industry
   competitive advantage in, 42–43
   cost reduction in, 35–41
   customer experience in, 5
   disruptive potential of, 47
   efficiency frontier in, 29, 31
   network effect, 115
   pain points in, 31–35, 34t
   surge pricing in, 35–41
Robert Bosch, 156
Rolls-Royce, 16, 183–184
Roomba, 196

Salesforce, 152, 186
search, external, 248
selection tables, 198, 248
sensing technologies, 225, 227
Sensoria, 76
sensors, wearable, 76
Shiseido, 73
Siri, 210
SmartInhaler, 106
software-as-a-service revenue model, 186
South Korean grocery market, 27–28
Square, 104–105
stack framework, 201, 205–206
STAR (sense-transmit-analyze-react) approach, 200–201, 202t–203t
Stuart, Harborne W., Jr., 11
Sun Basket, 154
supply chain, 184
surge pricing, 35–41
Sweeten, 159

Target, 45–46
technology infrastructure
   classification trees for, 206–208, 207f
   deconstruction of, 198–201, 202t–203t, 225–228
   design alternatives for, 206–208, 209t
   identification of, 228–231
   importance of, 14–15
   innovation in, 209–213, 236–237
   role in connected strategy framework, 4
   sample scenarios for, 195–198
   stack framework, 201, 205–206
   visionary thinking for, 213–215
   worksheet for, 229w–230w
Tencent, 187–188
Tesco, 27–28, 29f
textbooks, smart, 2, 7–9, 34, 92–93, 102
three-dimensional printing technology, 73, 228
tipping, virtual, 187–188
traditional revenue models, 178–179
training neural networks, 85
transactional friction, 179, 180
transaction costs, 53
   See also cost reduction
transaction revenues, 166–167
TransferWise, 166
transmitting technologies, 227
TripAdvisor, 190
true personalization, 73
trust
   data-protection policies, 116–118, 144
   importance of, 44–46, 236
   revenue models and, 178–180
   why-how ladder, 107–110, 109f, 133–134

Uber
  competitive advantage, 5, 32, 43
  connection architecture, 10, 12, 170–171
  efficiency frontier, 29
  respond-to-desire customer experience, 70
  See also ride-hailing industry
Uberization, 170
Vacation Rental by Owners (VRBO), 38
value creation, 181–183
Venmo, 165–166
voice recognition, 209–211
Volkswagen, 151
Volocopter, 213
Volpp, Kevin, 11

Wallaby Financial, 157–158
Wawa, 208
Wealthfront, 153–154
wearable sensors, 76
Wearable X, 76
WeChat, 188
Weinman, Lynda, 93
why-how ladder, 107–110, 109f, 133–134
willingness-to-pay
  definition of, 22
  drivers of, 52–55
  in education, 95, 95f
  identifying drivers of, 126–130
  in meal-kit delivery services, 25
  in ride-hailing industry, 31–35
  worksheets for, 54w, 130w
  See also efficiency frontier
worksheets
  connected strategy matrix, 219w, 223w
  customer journey, 125w
  deconstruction, 226w
  efficiency frontier, 56w
  information flow, 132w
  pain points, 130w, 139w
  repeated customer experiences, 143w
  technological solutions, 229w–230w
  why-how ladder, 134w
  willingness-to-pay drivers, 54w, 130w
World of Warcraft, 80
Wozniak, Steve, 205, 208

Xerox PARC, 208

Yandex, 29
YouTube, 167

Zalando, 105, 155
Zipcar, 11, 155–156
Zipline, 213
ZocDoc, 38
         ABOUT THE AUTHORS AND
           ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Both of us grew up in Germany but pursued (for Germans) uncommon
education paths. After receiving a diplom in business information
technology at the University of Mannheim, Christian studied at INSEAD in
France to receive his PhD in management. Similarly, after completing
German high school, Nicolaj went to Stanford University as an
undergraduate, receiving a BA in economics, and then on to Harvard,
studying under Michael Porter, to receive a PhD in business economics. We
both joined the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1998
as faculty members, Christian in the Operations, Information and Decisions
Department and Nicolaj in the Management Department. Over time, we
worked ourselves up the ranks and both now hold endowed chairs. Christian
is the Andrew M. Heller Professor and also holds a faculty appointment in
Penn’s Perelman School of Medicine. Nicolaj is the David M. Knott
Professor and a former department chair of Wharton’s Management
Department.
    Our research has appeared in many of the leading academic journals in
our fields—Christian focusing on operations management and innovation
management, and Nicolaj on strategy and organizational design—including
Management Science, the Strategic Management Journal, Administrative
Science Quarterly, and the New England Journal of Medicine. We are also
members of the editorial boards of key academic journals. Christian is the
coauthor of Matching Supply with Demand, a widely used textbook in
operations management, and of Innovation Tournaments, a guide for
creating and selecting exceptional opportunities within organizations.
   Both of us very much enjoy teaching in our MBA and executive MBA
programs. Together, we have won more than fifty teaching awards in the
Wharton classroom. One key perk of working at a top business school is the
opportunity to present our work in front of many executive audiences.
Nicolaj serves as academic director at Wharton Executive Education for
two open-enrollment courses on strategy (Creating and Implementing
Strategy for Competitive Advantage and Effective Execution of
Organizational Strategy), while Christian is academic director for a program
on innovation management (Mastering Innovation: From Idea to Value
Creation). We have researched with and consulted for more than one
hundred different organizations, from small startups to Fortune 500
companies.
   To achieve broader reach in our teaching efforts, both of us have created
online courses as well. Christian was the first to launch a massive open
online course (MOOC) in business on Coursera. By now, close to one
million students have enrolled in his Introduction to Operations
Management course, making this one of the largest online courses. Nicolaj
is offering an online course titled Business Strategy from Wharton:
Competitive Advantage and the course Strategic Management: Competitive
and Corporate Strategy, which is part of Wharton’s online certificate on
leadership and management.
   Another way in which we have attempted to broaden our reach and have
the opportunity to learn is by hosting radio shows on Wharton’s Sirius XM
channel. Christian hosts the show Work of Tomorrow, highlighting how
technological advances affect the daily operations of many firms, while
Nicolaj cohosts Mastering Innovation, which addresses how organizations
foster innovation that keeps them going strong year after year.
   Lastly, both of us are codirectors of the Mack Institute for Innovation
Management at Wharton. The Mack Institute’s role is to bridge academic
research and the world of practice by sponsoring research, conducting
conferences, and connecting scholars, business leaders, and students. It was
through our work with executive audiences in the classroom and through
the Mack Institute that we became inspired to write this book. We observed
that firms were connecting to customers in very different ways and were
creating new connections between previously unconnected parties in the
marketplace. It has been an amazing journey to write this book, allowing us
to clarify our thinking and helping others to make more sense of the
business world they live in. However, to borrow a phrase from Winston
Churchill, we see this book certainly not as the end but only as the end of
the beginning of our research into connected strategies. It is an exciting
phenomenon that only has just started. Please stay in touch via our website,
connected-strategy.com, as our thinking evolves on this subject.
   We wouldn’t have been able to write this book without the support of
many. First of all, we’d like to thank all our MBA and WEMBA students
and Executive Education participants at Wharton who over the years have
pushed our thinking and forced us to reevaluate how firms create and
sustain competitive advantage. The second big thanks goes to Melinda
Merino from Harvard Business Review Press, who believed in our project
and has given us tremendously helpful feedback throughout the writing and
publication process.
   We received very valuable research assistance from Matthew Dabaco,
Sunil Gottumukkala, Bryan Hong, Jeni Incontro, Ajay Jagannath, Pragna
Kolli, Tony Li, Peter Mahon, Josh McLane, Venkat Mendu, Nikhil Nayak,
Rohith Ramkumar, Alexandre Teixeira, and Hicham Zahr. Thanks also to
four anonymous reviewers who had many helpful suggestions. We are very
much indebted to Arik Anderson, Leah Belsky, Carter Cleveland, Justin
Dawe, Steven Dominguez, Nick Franklin, John Hass, Josh Hix, Jeff Hurst,
Stephan Laster, Sarah Mastrorocco, Eric Merz, Jennifer Neumaier, Florian
Reuter, Sonesh Shah, Garth Sutherland, Rambabu Vallabhajosula, Greg
Wallace, and Tom Wang for discussing their connected strategies with us.
Very valuable editorial help was provided by Angie Basiouny, Greg Bates,
Michelle Eckert, and Katherine Fitz-Henry, and Deborah Watson who
performed some last-minute heroics. Special thanks are due to Adam Grant,
who has graciously shared with us his extensive learnings concerning the
publishing experience. Finally, we are very grateful to the Wharton School
and the Mack Institute for Innovation Management for financial support.
